Physics developed since 1901

         It has been suggested that this article be merged with Classical
[50px-M] physics to Classical and modern physics. (Discuss) Proposed since
         February 2025.

[430px-Modernphysicsfields]
Classical physics is usually concerned with everyday conditions: speeds are
much lower than the speed of light, sizes are much greater than that of atoms,
yet very small in astronomical terms. Modern physics, however, is concerned
with high velocities, small distances, and very large energies.

Part of a series on
             Physics
[100px-Stylise]
  • Index
  • Outline
  • Glossary

  • History (timeline)

Branches

  • Acoustics
  • Astrophysics
  • Atomic physics
  • Biophysics
  • Classical physics
  • Electromagnetism
  • Geophysics
  • Mechanics
  • Modern physics
  • Nuclear physics
  • Optics
  • Thermodynamics

Research

  • Physicist (list)
  • List of physics awards
  • List TESTWESRW3Rof journals]]
  • List of unsolved problems

  • icon Physics portal
  • ● Category

  • v
  • t
  • e

Modern physics is a branch of physics that developed in the early 20th century
and onward or branches greatly influenced by early 20th century physics.
Notable branches of modern physics include quantum mechanics, special
relativity, and general relativity.

Classical physics is typically concerned with everyday conditions: speeds are
much lower than the speed of light, sizes are much greater than that of atoms,
and energies are relatively small. Modern physics, however, is concerned with
more extreme conditions, such as high velocities that are comparable to the
speed of light (special relativity), small distances comparable to the atomic
radius (quantum mechanics), and very high energies (relativity). In general,
quantum and relativistic effects are believed to exist across all scales,
although these effects may be very small at human scale. While quantum
mechanics is compatible with special relativity (See: Relativistic quantum
mechanics), one of the unsolved problems in physics is the unification of
quantum mechanics and general relativity, which the Standard Model of particle
physics currently cannot account for.

Modern physics is an effort to understand the underlying processes of the
interactions of matter using the tools of science and engineering. In a literal
sense, the term modern physics means up-to-date physics. In this sense, a
significant portion of so-called classical physics is modern.^[1] However,
since roughly 1890, new discoveries have caused significant paradigm shifts:^[1
] especially the advent of quantum mechanics (QM) and relativity (ER). Physics
that incorporates elements of either QM or ER (or both) is said to be modern
physics. It is in this latter sense that the term is generally used.^[1]

Modern physics is often encountered when dealing with extreme conditions.
Quantum mechanical effects tend to appear when dealing with "lows" (low
temperatures, small distances), while relativistic effects tend to appear when
dealing with "highs" (high velocities, large distances), the "middles" being
classical behavior. For example, when analyzing the behavior of a gas at room
temperature, most phenomena will involve the (classical) Maxwell–Boltzmann
distribution. However, near absolute zero, the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution
fails to account for the observed behavior of the gas, and the (modern)
Fermi–Dirac or Bose–Einstein distributions have to be used instead.

[250px-Albert_Eins]
[151px-Max_Planck_193]
German physicists Albert Einstein (1879–1955), founder of the theory of
relativity, and Max Planck (1858–1947), proposed quantum explanations for
blackbody radiation

Very often, it is possible to find – or "retrieve" – the classical behavior
from the modern description by analyzing the modern description at low speeds
and large distances (by taking a limit, or by making an approximation). When
doing so, the result is called the classical limit.

[250px-Black_body]
Classical physics (Rayleigh–Jeans law, black line) failed to explain black-body
radiation – the so-called ultraviolet catastrophe. The quantum description (
Planck's law, colored lines) is said to be modern physics.

Hallmarks

Main articles: History of quantum mechanics and History of relativity

These are generally considered to be the topics regarded as the "core" of the
foundation of modern physics:

  • Atomic theory and the evolution of the atomic model in general
  • Black-body radiation
  • Oil drop experiment
  • Franck–Hertz experiment
  • Geiger–Marsden experiment (Rutherford's experiment)
  • Gravitational lensing
  • Michelson–Morley experiment
  • Photoelectric effect
  • Quantum thermodynamics
  • Radioactive phenomena in general
  • Perihelion precession of Mercury
  • Stern–Gerlach experiment
  • Wave–particle duality
  • Solid-state physics

See also

  • iconPhysics portal

  • History of physics
  • Classical physics
  • Distinction between classical and modern physics
  • Quantum mechanics
  • Theory of relativity
  • Quantum field theory
  • Unified field theory
  • Nuclear Fission

References

  • A. Beiser (2003). Concepts of Modern Physics (6th ed.). McGraw-Hill. ISBN 
    978-0-07-123460-3.
  • P. Tipler, R. Llewellyn (2002). Modern Physics (4th ed.). W. H. Freeman.
    ISBN 978-0-7167-4345-3.

Notes

 1. 1 2 3 F. K. Richtmyer; E. H. Kennard; T. Lauristen (1955). Introduction to
    Modern Physics (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 1. LCCN 55006862.

External links

                             • v
                             • t
                             • e

                 Major branches of physics
                    • Pure
    Divisions       • Applied
                        □ Engineering

                    • Experimental
   Approaches       • Theoretical
                        □ Computational

                    • Classical mechanics
                        □ Newtonian
                        □ Analytical
                        □ Celestial
                        □ Continuum
                    • Acoustics
    Classical       • Classical electromagnetism
                    • Classical optics
                        □ Ray
                        □ Wave
                    • Thermodynamics
                        □ Statistical
                        □ Non-equilibrium

                    • Relativistic mechanics
                        □ Special
                        □ General
                    • Nuclear physics
                    • Particle physics
                    • Quantum mechanics
     Modern         • Atomic, molecular, and optical physics
                        □ Atomic
                        □ Molecular
                        □ Modern optics
                    • Condensed matter physics
                        □ Solid-state physics
                        □ Crystallography

                    • Astrophysics
                    • Atmospheric physics
                    • Biophysics
                    • Chemical physics
                    • Geophysics
Interdisciplinary   • Materials science
                    • Mathematical physics
                    • Medical physics
                    • Ocean physics
                    • Quantum information science

                    • History of physics
                    • Nobel Prize in Physics
     Related        • Philosophy of physics
                    • Physics education
                        □ research
                    • Timeline of physics discoveries

                               • v
                               • t
                               • e

                 History of physics (timeline)
                          • Astronomy
                              □ timeline
                          • Electromagnetism
                              □ timeline
                              □ Electrical engineering
                              □ Maxwell's equations
                          • Fluid mechanics
                              □ timeline
                              □ Aerodynamics
                          • Field theory
                          • Gravitational theory
                              □ timeline
   Classical physics      • Material science
                              □ timeline
                              □ Metamaterials
                          • Mechanics
                              □ timeline
                              □ Variational principles
                          • Optics
                              □ Spectroscopy
                          • Thermodynamics
                              □ timeline
                              □ Energy
                              □ Entropy
                              □ Perpetual motion

                          • Computational physics
                              □ timeline
                          • Condensed matter
                              □ timeline
                              □ Superconductivity
                          • Cosmology
                              □ timeline
                              □ Big Bang theory
                          • General relativity
                              □ tests
                          • Geophysics
                          • Nuclear physics
                              □ Fission
    Modern physics            □ Fusion
                              □ Power
                              □ Weapons
                          • Quantum mechanics
                              □ timeline
                              □ Atoms
                              □ Molecules
                              □ Quantum field theory
                          • Subatomic physics
                              □ timeline
                          • Special relativity
                              □ timeline
                              □ Lorentz transformations
                              □ tests

                          • Quantum information
                              □ timeline
  Recent developments     • Loop quantum gravity
                          • Nanotechnology
                          • String theory

                          • Cosmic microwave background
                          • Graphene
                          • Gravitational waves
                          • Subatomic particles
On specific discoveries       □ timeline
                              □ Higgs boson
                              □ Neutron
                          • Speed of light

                          • Copernican Revolution
                          • Golden age of cosmology
                          • Golden age of physics
      By periods          • Medieval Islamic world
                              □ Astronomy
                          • Noisy intermediate-scale quantum era

                          • Harvard Computers
                          • The Martians
       By groups          • Oxford Calculators
                          • Via Panisperna boys
                          • Women in physics

                          • Bohr–Einstein
                          • Chandrasekhar–Eddington
                          • Galileo affair
                          • Leibniz–Newton
                          • Joule–von Mayer
  Scientific disputes     • Shapley–Curtis
                          • Relativity priority
                              □ Special relativity
                              □ General relativity
                          • Transfermium Wars

  • ● Category

Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata   • Germany
                                                              • Czech Republic
