Study of the past

This article is about the academic discipline. For a general history of human
beings, see Human history. For a general history of Earth, see History of Earth
. For other uses, see History (disambiguation).

Part of a series on
                                    History
[240px-Gerard_Dou_-_Hourglass_and_]
Study of the past
  • Index
  • Outline
  • Glossary

Key concepts

  • Archeology
  • Chronology
  • Common Era (anno Domini, Gregorian calendar)
  • Historical method
  • Historiography
  • Periodization
  • Recorded history
  • Historical source (primary, secondary, tertiary)

Periods

  • Prehistory
  • Ancient history (Bronze Age, classical antiquity)
  • Post-classical history (Early Middle Ages, High Middle Ages, Late Middle
    Ages)
  • Modern history (early modern history, late modern history, contemporary
    history)

By region

  • Africa
  • Antarctica
  • Australia
  • Central America
  • East Asia
  • Europe
  • Middle East
  • New Zealand
  • North America
  • Pacific Islands
  • South America
  • South Asia
  • Southeast Asia
  • The Caribbean

Notable historians

  • Ban Gu
  • Ban Zhao
  • Bede
  • Dio
  • Gibbon
  • Herodotus
  • Ibn Khaldun
  • Isidore
  • Josephus
  • Livy
  • Manetho
  • Plutarch
  • Polybius
  • Sallust
  • Suetonius
  • Tacitus
  • Taylor
  • Thucydides
  • Xenophon
  • Zuo

Timelines

  • Prehistoric
  • Ancient
  • Post-classical
  • Modern
  • Future

  • ● History portal
  • ● Category

  • v
  • t
  • e

History is the systematic study of the past. As an academic discipline, it
analyzes and interprets evidence to construct narratives about what happened
and explain why it happened, focusing primarily on the human past. Some
theorists categorize history as a social science, while others see it as part
of the humanities or consider it a hybrid discipline. Similar debates surround
the purpose of history, for example, whether its main aim is theoretical, to
uncover the truth, or practical, to learn lessons from the past. In a slightly
different sense, the term history refers not to an academic field but to the
past itself or to individual texts about the past.

Historical research relies on primary and secondary sources to reconstruct past
events and validate interpretations. Source criticism is used to evaluate these
sources, assessing their authenticity, content, and reliability. Historians
integrate the perspectives of several individual sources to develop a coherent
narrative. Different schools of thought, such as positivism, the Annales school
, Marxism, and postmodernism, have distinct methodological approaches.

History is a broad discipline encompassing many branches. Some focus on
specific time periods, such as ancient history, while others concentrate on
particular geographic regions, such as the history of Africa. Thematic
categorizations include political history, social history, and economic history
. Branches associated with specific research methods include quantitative
history, comparative history, and oral history.

History emerged as a field of inquiry in the ancient period to replace
myth-infused narratives, with influential early traditions originating in
Greece, China, and later also in the Islamic world. Historical writing evolved
throughout the ages and became increasingly professional, particularly during
the 19th century, when a rigorous methodology and various academic institutions
were established. History is related to many fields, including historiography,
philosophy, education, and politics.

Definition

As an academic discipline, history is the study of the past.^[1] It
conceptualizes and describes what happened by collecting and analysing evidence
to construct narratives. These narratives cover not only how events unfolded
but also why they happened and in which contexts, providing an explanation of
relevant background conditions and causal mechanisms. History further examines
the meaning of historical events and the underlying human motives driving them.
^[2]

In a slightly different sense, history refers to the past events themselves. In
this sense, history is what happened rather than the academic field studying
what happened. When used as a countable noun, a history is a representation of
the past in the form of a history text. History texts are cultural products
involving active interpretation and reconstruction. The narratives presented in
them can change as historians discover new evidence or reinterpret
already-known sources. The nature of the past itself, by contrast, is static
and unchangeable.^[3] Some historians focus on the interpretative and
explanatory aspects to distinguish histories from chronicles, arguing that
chronicles only catalogue events in chronological order, whereas histories aim
at a comprehensive understanding of their causes, contexts, and consequences.^[
4]^[a]

Traditionally, history was primarily concerned with written documents. It
focused on recorded history since the invention of writing, leaving prehistory^
[b] to other fields, such as archaeology.^[7] Today, history has a broader
scope as one of the disciplines interested in human history before the
invention of writing.^[8]^[c]

It is controversial whether history is a social science or forms part of the
humanities. Like social scientists, historians formulate hypotheses, gather
objective evidence, and present arguments based on this evidence. At the same
time, history aligns closely with the humanities because of its reliance on
subjective aspects associated with interpretation, storytelling, human
experience, and cultural heritage.^[10] Some historians strongly support one or
the other classification while others characterize history as a hybrid
discipline that does not belong to one category at the exclusion of the other.^
[11] History contrasts with pseudohistory, a label used to describe practices
that deviate from historiographical standards by relying on disputed historical
evidence, selectively ignoring genuine evidence, or using other means to
distort the historical record. Often motivated by specific ideological agendas,
pseudohistorical practices mimic historical methodology to promote misleading
narratives that lack rigorous analysis and scholarly consensus.^[12]

Purpose

Various suggestions about the purpose or value of history have been made. Some
historians propose that its primary function is the pure discovery of truth
about the past. This view emphasizes that the disinterested pursuit of truth is
an end in itself, while external purposes, associated with ideology or politics
, threaten to undermine the accuracy of historical research by distorting the
past. In this role, history also challenges traditional myths lacking factual
support.^[13]

A different perspective suggests that the main value of history lies in the
lessons it teaches for the present. This view is based on the idea that an
understanding of the past can guide decision-making, for example, to avoid
repeating previous mistakes.^[14] A related perspective focuses on a general
understanding of the human condition, making people aware of the diversity of
human behaviour across different contexts—similar to what one can learn by
visiting foreign countries.^[15] History can also foster social cohesion by
providing people with a collective identity through a shared past, helping to
preserve and cultivate cultural heritage and values across generations.^[16]
For some scholars, including whig historians and the Marxist scholar E. H. Carr
, history is a key to understanding the present^[17] and, in Carr's case,
shaping the future.^[18]

History is sometimes used for political or ideological purposes, for instance,
to justify the status quo by emphasising the respectability of certain
traditions or to promote change by highlighting past injustices.^[19] Pushed to
extreme forms, this can result in pseudohistory or historical denialism^[d]
when evidence is intentionally ignored or misinterpreted to construct
misleading narratives serving external interests.^[12]

Etymology

Photo of a damaged text written in black ink
Fragment of the Histories by Herodotus, an Ancient Greek historical text^[21]

The word history comes from the Ancient Greek term ἵστωρ (histōr), meaning '
learned, wise man'. It gave rise to the Ancient Greek word ἱστορία (historiā),
which had a wide meaning associated with inquiry in general and giving
testimony. The term was later adopted into Classical Latin as historia. In
Hellenistic and Roman times, the meaning of the term shifted, placing more
emphasis on narrative aspects and the art of presentation rather than focusing
on investigation and testimony.^[22]

The word entered Middle English in the 14th century via the Old French term 
histoire.^[23] At this time, it meant 'story, tale', encompassing both factual
and fictional narratives. In the 15th century, its meaning shifted to cover the
branch of knowledge studying the past in addition to narratives about the past.
^[24] In the 18th and 19th centuries, the word history became more closely
associated with factual accounts and evidence-based inquiry, coinciding with
the professionalization of historical inquiry.^[25] The dual meaning, referring
to both mere stories and factual accounts of the past, is present in the terms
for history in many other European languages. They include the French histoire,
the Italian storia, and the German Geschichte.^[26]

Methods

Main article: Historical method

The historical method is a set of techniques historians use to research and
interpret the past, covering the processes of collecting, evaluating, and
synthesizing evidence.^[e] It seeks to ensure scholarly rigour, accuracy, and
reliability in how historical evidence is chosen, analysed, and interpreted.^[
28] Historical research often starts with a research question to define the
scope of the inquiry. Some research questions focus on a simple description of
what happened. Others aim to explain why a particular event occurred, refute an
existing theory, or confirm a new hypothesis.^[29]

Sources and source criticism

To answer research questions, historians rely on various types of evidence to
reconstruct the past and support their conclusions. Historical evidence is
usually divided into primary and secondary sources.^[30] A primary source is a
source that originated during the period that is studied. Primary sources can
take various forms, such as official documents, letters, diaries, eyewitness
accounts, photographs, and audio or video recordings. They also include
historical remains examined in archaeology, geology, and the medical sciences,
such as artefacts and fossils unearthed from excavations. Primary sources offer
the most direct evidence of historical events.^[31]

Photo of archive storage area; on the left, the hand cranks to operate shelving
units; on the right, the shelves of one unit containing storage boxes
Archives preserve large quantities of original sources for researchers to
access.^[32]

A secondary source is a source that analyses or interprets information found in
other sources.^[33] Whether a document is a primary or a secondary source
depends not only on the document itself but also on the purpose for which it is
used. For example, if a historian writes a text about slavery based on an
analysis of historical documents, then the text is a secondary source on
slavery and a primary source on the historian's opinion.^[34]^[f] Consistency
with available sources is one of the main standards of historical works. For
instance, the discovery of new sources may lead historians to revise or dismiss
previously accepted narratives.^[36] To find and access primary and secondary
sources, historians consult archives, libraries, and museums. Archives play a
central role by preserving countless original sources and making them available
to researchers in a systematic and accessible manner. Thanks to technological
advances, historians increasingly rely on online resources, which offer vast
digital databases with efficient methods to search and access specific
documents.^[37]

Source criticism is the process of analysing and evaluating the information a
source provides.^[g] Typically, this process begins with external criticism,
which evaluates the authenticity of a source. It addresses the questions of
when and where the source was created and seeks to identify the author,
understand their reasons for producing the source, and determine if it has
undergone some type of modification since its creation. Additionally, the
process involves distinguishing between original works, mere copies, and
deceptive forgeries.^[39]

Internal criticism evaluates the content of a source, typically beginning with
the clarification of the meaning within the source. This involves
disambiguating individual terms that could be misunderstood but may also
require a general translation if the source is written in an ancient language.^
[h] Once the information content of a source is understood, internal criticism
is specifically interested in determining accuracy. Critics ask whether the
information is reliable or misrepresents the topic and further question whether
the source is comprehensive or omits important details. One way to make these
assessments is to evaluate whether the author was able, in principle, to
provide a faithful presentation of the studied event and to consider the
influences of their intentions and prejudices. Being aware of the inadequacies
of a source helps historians decide whether and which aspects of it to trust,
and how to use it to construct a narrative.^[41]

Synthesis and schools of thought

The selection, analysis, and criticism of sources result in the validation of a
large collection of mostly isolated statements about the past. As a next step,
sometimes termed historical synthesis, historians examine how the individual
pieces of evidence fit together to form part of a larger story.^[i]
Constructing this broader perspective is crucial for a comprehensive
understanding of the topic as a whole. It is a creative aspect^[j] of
historical writing that reconstructs, interprets, and explains what happened by
showing how different events are connected.^[44] In this way, historians
address not only which events occurred but also why they occurred and what
consequences they had.^[45] While there are no universally accepted techniques
for this synthesis, historians rely on various interpretative tools and
approaches in this process.^[46]

Drawing of a seated man in formal dark clothes
Auguste Comte articulated positivism, advocating a science-based approach to
history.^[47]

One tool to provide an accessible overview of complex developments is the use
of periodization, which divides a timeframe into different periods, each
organized around central themes or developments that shaped the period. For
example, the three-age system divides early human history into Stone Age,
Bronze Age, and Iron Age based on the predominant materials and technologies
during these periods.^[48] Another methodological tool is the examination of
silences, gaps or omissions in the historical record of events that occurred
but did not leave significant evidential traces. Silences can happen when
contemporaries find information too obvious to document but may also occur if
there are specific reasons to withhold or destroy information.^[49]^[k]
Conversely, when large datasets are available, quantitative approaches can be
used. For instance, economic and social historians commonly employ statistical
analysis to identify patterns and trends associated with large groups.^[51]

Different schools of thought often come with their own methodological
implications for how to write history.^[52] Positivists emphasize the
scientific nature of historical inquiry, focusing on empirical evidence to
discover objective truths.^[53] In contrast, postmodernists reject grand
narratives that claim to offer a single, objective truth. Instead, they
highlight the subjective nature of historical interpretation, which leads to a
multiplicity of divergent perspectives.^[54] Marxists interpret historical
developments as expressions of economic forces and class struggles.^[55] The
Annales school highlights long-term social and economic trends while relying on
quantitative and interdisciplinary methods.^[56] Feminist historians study the
role of gender in history, with a particular interest in the experiences of
women to challenge patriarchal perspectives.^[57]

Areas of study

History is a wide field of inquiry encompassing many branches. Some branches
focus on a specific time period, while others concentrate on a particular
geographic region or a distinct theme. Specializations of different types can
usually be combined; for example, a work on economic history in ancient Egypt
merges temporal, regional, and thematic perspectives. For topics with a broad
scope, the amount of primary sources is often too extensive for an individual
historian to review, forcing them to either narrow the scope of their topic or
rely on secondary sources to arrive at a wide overview.^[58]

By period

Chronological division is a common approach to organizing the vast expanse of
history into more manageable segments. Different periods are often defined
based on dominant themes that characterize a specific time frame and
significant events that initiated these developments or brought them to an end.
Depending on the selected context and level of detail, a period may be as short
as a decade or longer than several centuries.^[59] A traditionally influential
approach divides human history into prehistory, ancient history, post-classical
history, early modern history, and modern history.^[60]^[l] Depending on the
region and theme, the time frames covered by these periods can vary and
historians may use entirely different periodizations.^[62] For example,
traditional periodizations of Chinese history follow the main dynasties,^[63]
and the division into pre-Columbian, colonial, and post-colonial periods plays
a central role in the history of the Americas.^[64]

Photo of the skeleton of a female hominin in a standing position, displayed in
a museum
Historians draw on evidence from various fields to examine prehistory,
including fossils like Lucy.^[65]

The study of prehistory includes the examination of the evolution of human-like
species several million years ago, leading to the emergence of anatomically
modern humans about 200,000 years ago.^[66] Subsequently, humans migrated out
of Africa to populate most of the earth. Towards the end of prehistory,
technological advances in the form of new and improved tools led many groups to
give up their established nomadic lifestyle, based on hunting and gathering, in
favour of a sedentary lifestyle supported by early forms of agriculture.^[67]
The absence of written documents from this period presents researchers with
unique challenges. It results in an interdisciplinary approach relying on other
forms of evidence from fields such as archaeology, anthropology, palaeontology,
and geology.^[68]

Ancient historians examine the emergence of the first major civilizations in
regions such as Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, and Peru,
beginning as early as 3500 BCE in some regions. The new social, economic, and
political complexities necessitated the development of writing systems. Thanks
to advancements in agriculture, surplus food allowed these civilizations to
support larger populations, leading to urbanization, the establishment of trade
networks, and the emergence of regional empires. Meanwhile, influential
religious systems and philosophical ideas were first formulated, such as
Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Judaism, and Greek philosophy.^[69]

In the study of post-classical history, which began around 500 CE, historians
note the growing influence of religions. Missionary religions, like Buddhism,
Christianity, and Islam, spread rapidly and established themselves as world
religions, marking a cultural shift as they gradually replaced local belief
systems. Meanwhile, inter-regional trade networks flourished, leading to
increased technological and cultural exchange. Conquering many territories in
Asia and Europe, the Mongol Empire became a dominant force during the 13th and
14th centuries.^[70]

Historians focused on early modern history, which started roughly 1500 CE,
commonly highlight how European states rose to global power. As gunpowder
empires, they explored and colonized large parts of the world. As a result, the
Americas were integrated into the global network, triggering a vast biological
exchange of plants, animals, people, and diseases.^[m] The Scientific
Revolution prompted major discoveries and accelerated technological progress.
It was accompanied by other intellectual developments, such as humanism and the
Enlightenment, which ushered in secularization.^[72]

Oil painting of worker in an iron rolling mill
The Industrial Revolution had a profound impact on economic and social life,
marking the transition from agrarian to industrial societies.^[73]

In the study of modern history, which began at the end of the 18th century,
historians are interested in how the Industrial Revolution transformed
economies by introducing more efficient modes of production. Western powers
established vast colonial empires, gaining superiority through industrialized
military technology. The increased international exchange of goods, ideas, and
people marked the beginning of globalization. Various social revolutions
challenged autocratic and colonial regimes, paving the way for democracies.
Many developments in fields like science, technology, economy, living
standards, and human population accelerated at unprecedented rates. This
happened despite the widespread destruction caused by two world wars, which
rebalanced international power relations by undermining European dominance.^[74
]

By geographic location

Areas of historical study can also be categorized by the geographic locations
they examine.^[75] Geography plays a central role in history through its
influence on food production, natural resources, economic activities, political
boundaries, and cultural interactions.^[76]^[n] Some historical works limit
their scope to small regions, such as a village or a settlement. Others focus
on broad territories that encompass entire continents, like the histories of
Africa, Asia, Europe, the Americas, and Oceania.^[78]

Photo of the Pyramids of Giza, with the three main pyramids at the center
against a blue sky in the background
The Pyramids of Giza showcase the lasting heritage of the ancient Egyptian
civilization.^[79]

The history of Africa begins with the examination of the evolution of
anatomically modern humans.^[80] Ancient historians describe how the invention
of writing and the establishment of civilization happened in ancient Egypt in
the 4th millennium BCE.^[81] Over the next millennia, other notable
civilizations and kingdoms formed in Nubia, Axum, Carthage, Ghana, Mali, and
Songhay.^[82] Islam began spreading across North Africa in the 7th century CE
and became the dominant faith in many empires. Meanwhile, trade along the
trans-Saharan route intensified.^[83] Beginning in the 15th century, millions
of Africans were enslaved and forcibly transported to the Americas as part of
the Atlantic slave trade.^[84] Most of the continent was colonized by European
powers in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.^[85] Among rising nationalism
, African states gradually gained independence in the aftermath of World War II
, a period that saw economic progress, rapid population growth, and struggles
for political stability.^[86]

Portrait of an old, bearded Genghis dressed in white clothing
In the 13th century, Genghis Khan conquered large parts of Asia, establishing
the Mongol Empire.^[87]

Historians studying the history of Asia note the arrival of anatomically modern
humans around 100,000 years ago.^[88] They explore Asia's role as one of the
cradles of civilization, with the emergence of some of the first ancient
civilizations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley, and China beginning in the 4th
and 3rd millennia BCE.^[89] In the following millennia, these civilizations
gave birth to all major world religions and several influential philosophical
traditions, such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, Christianity, and
Islam.^[90] Other developments were the establishment of the Silk Road, which
facilitated trade and cultural exchange across Eurasia, and the formation of
powerful empires, such as the Mongol Empire, which dominated the continent
during the 13th and 14th centuries CE.^[91] European influence grew over the
following centuries, ushering in the modern era. It culminated in the 19th and
early 20th centuries when many parts of Asia came under direct colonial control
until the end of World War II.^[92] The post-independence period was
characterized by modernization, economic growth, and a steep increase in
population.^[93]

In the study of the history of Europe, historians describe the arrival of the
first anatomically modern humans about 45,000 years ago.^[94] They explore how
the Ancient Greeks laid the foundations of Western culture, philosophy, and
politics in the first millennium BCE,^[95] and how their cultural heritage
continued within the Roman Empire and its continuation, the Byzantine Empire.^[
96] The medieval period began with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the
5th century CE and was marked by the spread of Christianity.^[97] Starting in
the 15th century, European exploration and colonization interconnected the
globe, while cultural, intellectual, and scientific developments transformed
Western societies.^[98] From the late 18th to the early 20th centuries,
European global dominance was further solidified by the Industrial Revolution
and the establishment of large overseas colonies.^[99] It came to an end
because of the devastating effects of two world wars.^[100] In the following
Cold War era, the continent was divided into a Western and an Eastern bloc.
They pursued political and economic integration in the aftermath of the Cold
War.^[101]

Historians examining the history of the Americas document the arrival of the
first humans around 20,000 to 15,000 years ago.^[102] The Americas were home to
some of the earliest civilizations, like the Norte Chico civilization in South
America and the Maya and Olmec civilizations in Central America.^[103] Over the
next millennia, major empires arose beside them, such as the Teotihuacan, Aztec
, and Inca empires.^[104] Following the arrival of the Europeans from the late
15th century onwards, the spread of newly introduced diseases drastically
reduced the local population. Together with colonization and the massive influx
of African slaves, it led to the collapse of major empires as demographic and
cultural landscapes were reshaped.^[105] Independence movements in the 18th and
19th centuries led to the formation of new nations across the Americas.^[106]
In the 20th century, the United States emerged as a dominant global power and a
key player in the Cold War.^[107]

In the study of the history of Oceania, historians note the arrival of humans
about 60,000 to 50,000 years ago.^[108] They explore the establishment of
diverse regional societies and cultures, first in Australia and Papua New
Guinea and later also on other Pacific Islands.^[109] The arrival of the
Europeans in the 16th century prompted significant transformations, and by the
end of the 19th century, most of the region had come under Western control.^[
110] Oceania was dragged into various conflicts during the world wars and
experienced decolonization in the post-war period.^[111]

By theme

Historians often limit their inquiry to a specific theme.^[112] Some propose a
general subdivision into three major themes: political history, economic
history, and social history. However, the boundaries between these branches are
vague and their relation to other thematic branches, such as intellectual
history, is not always clear.^[113]

Political history studies the organization of power in society, examining how
power structures arise, develop, and interact. Throughout most of recorded
history, states or state-like structures have been central to this field of
study. It explores how a state was organized internally, like factions, parties
, leaders, and other political institutions. It also examines which policies
were implemented and how the state interacted with other states.^[114]
Political history has been studied since antiquity, making it the oldest branch
of history, while other major subfields have only become established branches
in the past century.^[115]

Photo of a reconstructed medieval trebuchet on a stone platform against a
cloudy sky in the background
Military history studies armed conflicts, including advancements in military
technology, like trebuchets.^[116]

Diplomatic and military history are closely related to political history.
Diplomatic history examines international relations between states. It covers
foreign policy topics such as negotiations, strategic considerations, treaties,
and conflicts between nations as well as the role of international
organizations in these processes.^[117] Military history studies the impact and
development of armed conflicts in human history. This includes the examination
of specific events, like the analysis of a particular battle and the discussion
of the different causes of a war. It also involves more general considerations
about the evolution of warfare, including advancements in military technology,
strategies, tactics, and institutions.^[118]

Economic history examines how commodities are produced, exchanged, and
consumed. It covers economic aspects such as the use of land, labour, and
capital, the supply and demand of goods, the costs and means of production, and
the distribution of income and wealth. Economic historians typically focus on
general trends in the form of impersonal forces, such as inflation, rather than
the actions and decisions of individuals. If enough data is available, they
rely on quantitative methods, like statistical analysis. For periods before the
modern era, available data is often limited, forcing economic historians to
rely on scarce sources and extrapolate information from them.^[119]

Social history is a broad field investigating social phenomena, but its precise
definition is disputed. Some theorists understand it as the study of everyday
life outside the domains of politics and economics, including cultural
practices, family structures, community interactions, and education. A closely
related approach focuses on experience rather than activities, examining how
members of particular social groups, like social classes, races, genders, or
age groups, experienced their world. Other definitions see social history as
the study of social problems, like poverty, disease, and crime, or take a
broader perspective by examining how whole societies developed.^[120] Closely
related fields include cultural history, gender history, and religious history.
^[121]

Intellectual history is the history of ideas and studies how concepts,
philosophies, and ideologies have evolved. It is particularly interested in
academic fields but not limited to them, including the study of the beliefs and
prejudices of ordinary people. In addition to studying intellectual movements
themselves, it also examines the cultural and social contexts that shaped them
and their influence on other historical developments.^[122] As closely related
fields, the history of philosophy investigates the development of philosophical
thought^[123] while the history of science studies the evolution of scientific
theories and practices.^[124] Art history, another connected discipline,
examines historical works of art and the development of artistic activities,
styles, and movements.^[125]

Environmental history studies the relation between humans and their
environment. It seeks to understand how humans and the rest of nature have
affected each other in the course of history.^[126] Other thematic branches
include constitutional history, legal history, urban history, business history,
history of technology, medical history, history of education, and people's
history.^[127]

Others

Some branches of history are characterized by the methods they employ, such as
quantitative history and digital history, which rely on quantitative methods
and digital media.^[128] Comparative history compares historical phenomena from
distinct times, regions, or cultures to examine their similarities and
differences.^[129] Unlike most other branches, oral history relies on oral
reports rather than written documents, encompassing eyewitness accounts,
hearsay, and communal legends. It reflects the personal experiences,
interpretations, and memories of common people, showcasing not only what
objectively happened but also how people subjectively remember it.^[130]
Counterfactual history uses counterfactual thinking to examine alternative
courses of history, exploring what could have happened under different
circumstances.^[131] Certain branches of history are distinguished by their
theoretical outlook, such as Marxist and feminist history.^[132]

An old double-hemisphere map of the world
World history examines history on a global level, incorporating the whole of
human history.^[133]

Some distinctions focus on the scope of the studied topic. Big History is the
branch with the broadest scope, covering everything from the Big Bang to the
present, incorporating elements of cosmology, geology, biology, and
anthropology.^[134] World history is another branch with a wide topic. It
examines human history as a whole, starting with the evolution of human-like
species.^[135] The terms macrohistory, mesohistory, and microhistory refer to
different scales of analysis, ranging from large-scale patterns that affect the
whole globe to detailed studies of local contexts, small communities, family
histories, particular individuals, or specific events.^[136] Closely related to
microhistory is the genre of historical biography, which recounts an
individual's life in its historical context and the legacy it left.^[137]

Public history involves activities that present history to the general public.
It usually happens outside the traditional academic settings in contexts like
museums, historical sites, heritage tourism, and popular media.^[138]

Evolution of the discipline

Before the invention of writing, the preservation and transmission of
historical knowledge were limited to oral traditions.^[139] Early forms of
historical writing mixed facts with mythological elements, such as the Epic of
Gilgamesh from ancient Mesopotamia and Homer's Odyssey from ancient Greece.^[
140] Published in the 5th century BCE, the Histories by Herodotus (c. 484–420
BCE)^[o] was one of the foundational texts of the Western historical tradition,
putting more emphasis on factual accounts and evidence-based inquiry than
previous works.^[142] Thucydides (c. 460–400 BCE) followed and further refined
Herodotus's approach but focused more on particular political and military
developments in contrast to the wide scope and ethnographic elements of
Herodotus's work.^[143] Roman historiography was heavily influenced by Greek
traditions. It often included not only historical facts but also moral
judgments of historical figures.^[p] One school used an annalistic style,
arranging past events chronologically by year, while other historians preferred
continuous prose.^[145]

Photo of historical manuscript written in black ink
Sima Qian's Shiji was one of the earliest comprehensive accounts of the history
of China and the wider world known to the Chinese.^[146]

Another complex tradition of historical writing emerged in ancient China, with
early precursors starting in the late 2nd millennium BCE. It considered annals
the highest form of historical writing and emphasized verification through
sources. This tradition was associated with Confucian philosophy and closely
tied to the government in the form of the ruling dynasty. Chinese historians
established a coherent and systematic method for recording historical events
earlier than other traditions.^[147] Of particular influence was the work of
Sima Qian (c. 145–86/85 BCE), whose meticulous research method and inclusion of
alternative viewpoints shaped subsequent historiographical standards.^[148] In
ancient India, historical writing was closely associated with religion. It
often did not clearly distinguish between fact and myth, as seen in works like
the Mahabharata.^[149]

In Europe starting in late antiquity and continuing through the medieval period
, history was primarily documented by the clergy in the form of chronicles.
Christian historians drew from Greco-Roman and Jewish traditions and
reinterpreted the past from a religious perspective as a narrative highlighting
God's divine plan.^[150] Influential contributions shaping this tradition were
made by Eusebius of Caesarea (c. 260/275–339 CE), Augustine of Hippo (354–430
CE), and Bede (c. 672/3–735 CE).^[151] In the Islamic world, historical writing
was similarly influenced by religion, interpreting the past from a Muslim
perspective. It placed great importance on the chain of transmission to
preserve the authority of historical accounts.^[152] Al-Tabari (c. 838/839–923
CE) wrote a comprehensive history, spanning from the creation of the world to
his present day. Ibn Khaldun (1332–1406 CE) reflected on philosophical issues
underlying the practice of historians, such as universal patterns shaping
historical changes and the limits of historical truth.^[153]

With the emergence of the Tang Dynasty (618–907 CE) in China, historical
writing became increasingly institutionalized as a bureau for the writing of
history was established in 629 CE. This approach followed a strict distinction
between historical events and the historical texts describing them. The bureau
also oversaw the establishment of Veritable Records, a comprehensive
compilation serving as the basis of the standard national history.^[154]
Historical writing in the Song dynasty (960–1279 CE) happened in a variety of
historical genres, including encyclopedias, biographies, and historical novels,
while history became a standard subject in the Chinese educational system.^[155
] Influenced by the Chinese model, a tradition of historical writing emerged in
Japan in the 8th century CE. It was also closely related to the imperial
household, but Japanese historians placed less importance on critical source
evaluation than their Chinese counterparts.^[156]

During the Renaissance and the early modern period, the different historical
traditions came increasingly into contact with each other.^[157] Starting in
14th-century Europe, Renaissance humanists used sophisticated text criticism to
scrutinize earlier religious historical works, which contributed to the
secularization of historical writing. During the 15th to 17th centuries,
historians regarded history as a didactic tool. They began to target the
general public while the invention of the printing press made written documents
more accessible and affordable. At the same time, empiricist thought associated
with the Scientific Revolution questioned the possibility of arriving at
universal historical truths.^[158] During the Age of Enlightenment in the 18th
century, historical writing was influenced by rationalism and scepticism.
Historians tried to uncover deeper patterns and meaning in the past while the
scope of historical inquiry expanded to include societal and economic topics as
well as comparisons between different cultures.^[159]

In China during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), public interest in historical
writings and their availability also increased. In addition to the continuation
of the Veritable Records by official governmental historians, non-official
works by private scholars flourished. These scholars tended to use a more
creative style and sometimes challenged orthodox accounts.^[160] In the Islamic
world, new traditions of historical writings emerged in the Safavid, Mughal,
and Ottoman empires.^[161] Meanwhile in the Americas, European explorers
recorded and interpreted indigenous narratives, which had been passed down
through oral and pictographic practices. These views sometimes contested
traditional European perspectives.^[162]

Painting of an older man with white hair dressed in a formal black garment with
an ornate badge on his chest
Leopold von Ranke revolutionized the standards of historical scholarship by
introducing a thorough evaluation of primary sources.^[163]

Historical writing was transformed in the 19th century as it became more
professional and scientific. Following the work of Leopold von Ranke
(1795–1886), a systematic method of source criticism was widely accepted while
academic institutions dedicated to history were established in the form of
university departments, professional associations, and journals.^[164] In tune
with this scientific outlook, Auguste Comte (1798–1857) formulated the school
of positivism and aimed to discover general laws of history, similar to the
laws of nature studied by physicists.^[165] Building on the philosophy of Georg
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831), Karl Marx (1818–1883) described one such
general law, arguing that economic forces and class struggles are the
fundamental drivers of historical change.^[166] Another influential development
was the spread of European historiographical methods, which became the dominant
approach to the academic study of the past worldwide.^[167]

In the 20th century, traditional historical assumptions and practices were
challenged while the scope of historical research broadened.^[168] The Annales
school used insights from sociology, psychology, and economics to study
long-term developments.^[169] Authoritarian regimes, like Nazi Germany and the
Soviet Union, manipulated historical narratives for ideological purposes.^[170]
Various historians covered unconventional perspectives, focusing on the
experiences of marginalized groups through approaches such as history from
below, microhistory, and feminist history.^[171] Postcolonialism aimed to
undermine the hegemony of the Western approach and postmodernism rejected the
claim to a single universal truth in history.^[172] Intellectual historians
examined the historical development of ideas.^[173] In the second half of the
century, attempts to write histories of the world as a whole gained momentum,
while technological advances fostered the growth of quantitative and digital
history.^[174]

Related fields

Historiography

Main article: Historiography

Bust of a man with a turban and a beard
Ibn Khaldun was an influential figure in Islamic historiography.^[175]

Historiography is the study of the methods and development of historical
research. Historiographers examine what historians do, resulting in a
metatheory in the form of a history of history. Some theorists use the term
historiography in a different sense to refer to written accounts of the past.^[
176]

A central topic in historiography as a metatheory focuses on the standards of
evidence and reasoning in historical inquiry. Historiographers examine and
codify how historians use sources to construct narratives about the past,
including the analysis of the interpretative assumptions from which they
proceed. Closely related issues include the style and rhetorical presentation
of works of history.^[177]

By comparing the works of different historians, historiographers identify
schools of thought based on shared research methods, assumptions, and styles.^[
178] For example, they examine the characteristics of the Annales school, like
its use of quantitative data from various disciplines and its interest in
economic and social developments taking place over extended periods.^[179]
Comparisons also extend to whole eras from ancient to modern times. This way,
historiography traces the development of history as an academic discipline,
highlighting how the dominant methods, themes, and research goals have changed
over time.^[180]

Philosophy of history

Main article: Philosophy of history

The philosophy of history^[q] investigates the theoretical foundations of
history. It is interested both in the past itself as a series of interconnected
events and in the academic field studying this process. Insights and approaches
from various branches of philosophy are relevant to this endeavour, such as
metaphysics, epistemology, hermeneutics, and ethics.^[182]

In examining history as a process, philosophers explore the basic entities that
make up historical phenomena. Some approaches rely primarily on the beliefs and
actions of individual humans, while others include collective and other general
entities, such as civilizations, institutions, ideologies, and social forces.^[
183] A related topic concerns the nature of causal mechanisms connecting
historic events with their causes and consequences.^[184] One view holds that
there are general laws of history that determine the course of events, similar
to the laws of nature studied in the natural sciences. According to another
perspective, causal relations between historic events are unique and shaped by
contingent factors.^[185] Some philosophers suggest that the general direction
of the course of history follows large patterns. According to one proposal,
history is cyclic, meaning that on a sufficiently large scale, individual
events or general trends repeat. Another theory asserts that history is a
linear, teleological process moving towards a predetermined goal.^[186]^[r]

The topics of philosophy of history and historiography overlap as both are
interested in the standards of historical reasoning. Historiographers typically
focus more on describing specific methods and developments encountered in the
study of history. Philosophers of history, by contrast, tend to explore more
general patterns, including evaluative questions about which methods and
assumptions are correct.^[188] Historical reasoning is sometimes used in
philosophy and other disciplines as a method to explain phenomena. This
approach, known as historicism, argues that understanding something requires
knowledge of its unique history or how it evolved. For instance, historicism
about truth states that truth depends on historical circumstances, meaning that
there are no transhistorical truths. Historicism contrasts with approaches that
seek understanding based on timeless and universal principles.^[189]

Historical objectivity

Diverse debates in the philosophy of history focus on the possibility of an
objective account of history. Various theorists argue that this ideal is not
achievable, pointing to the subjective nature of interpretation, the narrative
aspect of history, and the influence of personal values on the perspective and
actions of both historic individuals and historians. According to one view,
some particular facts are objective, for example, facts about when a drought
occurred or which army was defeated. However, this view does not ensure general
objectivity since historians have to interpret and synthesize facts to arrive
at an overall narrative describing large trends and developments.^[190]

Some outlooks associated with realism, empiricism, and reconstructionism,^[191]
conceptualise history as the search for truth or knowledge, which they see as
recoverable through rigorous evaluation and careful interpretation of evidence.
^[192]^[s] Other scholars critique this view, emphasising the subjective and
partial nature of historical knowledge.^[t] Perspectivists claim that
historical perspectives are inherently subjective, as they require selecting
particular sources and inquiries, and ascertaining what information can be
thought as historical fact. They argue that statements can only be objective
within or relative to one of several competing historical perspectives.^[198] A
stronger scepticist or relativist outlook states that no historical knowledge
can be proven objective.^[199]^[u] This emphasis on subjectivities has been
extended by postmodernist theories that suggest that it is impossible to know
the past objectively, adding that meaning is created through human-made texts,
the language of which "constitute our world as we perceive it".^[201]^[v]
Neo-realists have responded to this trend by reemphasising the centrality of
empiricist methodologies to historical analysis, while recognising that there
are benefits gained from engaging with subjectivities.^[203]^[w]

Education

History is part of the school curriculum in most countries.^[204] Early history
education aims to make students interested in the past and familiarize them
with fundamental concepts of historical thought. By fostering a basic
historical awareness, it seeks to instil a sense of identity by helping them
understand their cultural roots.^[205] It often takes a narrative form by
presenting children with simple stories, which may focus on historic
individuals or the origins of local holidays, festivals, and food.^[206] More
advanced history education encountered in secondary school covers a broader
spectrum of topics, ranging from ancient to modern history, at both local and
global levels. It further aims to acquaint students with historical research
methodologies, including the abilities to interpret and critically evaluate
historical claims.^[207]

History teachers employ a variety of teaching methods. They include narrative
presentations of historical developments, questions to engage students and
prompt critical thinking, and discussions on historical topics. Students work
with historical sources directly to learn how to analyse and interpret
evidence, both individually and in group activities. They engage in historical
writing to develop the skills of articulating their thoughts clearly and
persuasively. Assessments through oral or written tests aim to ensure that
learning goals are reached.^[208] Traditional methodologies in history
education often present numerous facts, like dates of significant events and
names of historical figures, which students are expected to memorize.
Alternative approaches seek to foster a more active engagement and a deeper
understanding of general patterns, focusing not only on what happened but also
on why it happened and its lasting historical significance.^[209]

History education in state schools serves a variety of purposes. A key skill is
historical literacy, the ability to understand, critically analyse, and respond
to historical claims. By making students aware of significant developments in
the past, they become familiar with various contexts of human life, helping
them understand the present and its diverse cultures. At the same time, history
education fosters a sense of cultural identity and prepares students for active
citizenship.^[210] Knowledge of a shared past and cultural heritage contributes
to the formation of a national identity. This political aspect of history
education may spark disputes about which topics school textbooks should cover.
In various regions, it has resulted in so-called history wars over the
curriculum.^[211] It can lead to a biased treatment of controversial topics in
an attempt to present the national heritage in a favourable light.^[212]

Photo of a museum gallery showcasing a collection of historic artefacts
Informal education provided by exhibitions of historic artefacts in museums is
part of public history.^[213]

In addition to the formal education provided in public schools, history is also
taught in informal settings outside the classroom. Public history takes place
in locations like museums and memorial sites, where selected artefacts are
often used to tell specific stories.^[213] It includes popular history, which
aims to make the past accessible and appealing to a wide audience of
non-specialists in media such as books, television programmes, and online
content.^[214] Informal history education also happens in oral traditions as
narratives about the past are transmitted across generations.^[215]

Other fields

History employs an interdisciplinary methodology, drawing on findings from
fields such as archaeology, geology, genetics, anthropology, and linguistics.^[
216] Archaeologists study man-made historical artefacts and other forms of
material evidence. Their findings provide crucial insights into past human
activities and cultural developments.^[217] The interpretation of
archaeological evidence presents unique challenges that differ from the
standard historical work with written documents. At the same time, it offers
new possibilities by presenting information that was not recorded, allowing
historians to access the past of non-literate societies and marginalized groups
within literate societies by studying the remains of their material culture.
Before the advent of modern archaeology in the 19th century, antiquarianism
laid the groundwork for this discipline and played a vital role in preserving
historical artefacts.^[218]

Geology and other earth sciences help historians understand the environmental
contexts and physical processes that affected past societies, including climate
conditions, landscapes, and natural events.^[219] Genetics provides key
information about the evolutionary origins of humans as a species, human
migration, ancestry, and demographic changes.^[220] Anthropologists investigate
human culture and behaviour, such as social structures, belief systems, and
ritual practices. This knowledge offers contexts for the interpretation of
historical events.^[221] Historical linguistics studies the development of
languages over time, which can be crucial for the interpretation of ancient
documents and can also provide information about migration patterns and
cultural exchanges.^[222] Historians further rely on evidence from various
other fields belonging to the physical, biological, and social sciences as well
as the humanities.^[223]

In virtue of its relation to ideology and national identity, history is closely
connected to politics and historical theories can directly impact political
decisions. For example, irredentist attempts by one state to annex territory of
another state often rely on historical theories claiming that the disputed
territory belonged to the first state in the past.^[224] History also plays a
central role in so-called historical religions, which base some of their core
doctrines on historical events. For instance, Christianity is often categorized
as a historical religion because it is centred around historical events
surrounding Jesus Christ.^[225] History is relevant to many fields by studying
their past, including the history of science, mathematics, philosophy, and art.
^[226]

See also

  • ●History portal

  • Glossary of history
  • Outline of history

References

Notes

 1. ↑ Some authors restrict the term history to the factual series of past
    events and use the term historiography for the study of those events.
    Others use the term history for the study and representation of the past.
    They characterize historiography as a metatheory studying the methods and
    historical development of this academic discipline.^[5]
 2. ↑ Some theorists identify protohistory as a distinct period after
    prehistory that spans from the invention of writing to the first attempts
    to record history.^[6]
 3. ↑ Big History, formulated by the historian David Christian in the late
    1980s, reaches back even further to the Big Bang, incorporating elements of
    cosmology.^[9]
 4. ↑ Historical revisionism, a related outlook, seeks to overturn established
    perspectives on history. This can take a variety of forms, from the
    introduction of new evidence and methods which counter current thinking, to
    criticising the value or significance of historical events or actors. Some
    theorists use the term revisionism in a neutral sense for any rejection or
    reinterpretation of mainstream views. Others associate it with practices
    that disregard genuine evidence and incorporate intensely skeptical and
    relativist views to justify pseudohistorical perspectives, attempting to
    discredit established knowledge of historical events through epistemic
    criticism.^[20]
 5. ↑ Understood in a narrow sense, the historical method is sometimes limited
    to the evaluation or criticism of sources.^[27]
 6. ↑ The exact definitions of primary source and secondary source are disputed
    and there is not always consensus on how a particular source should be
    categorized. For example, if a person was not present at a riot but reports
    on it shortly after it happened, some historians consider this report a
    primary source while others see it as a secondary source.^[35]
 7. ↑ Leopold von Ranke's emphasis on source evaluation significantly
    influenced the practice of historical research.^[38]
 8. ↑ Historians consider the context and time of the document to understand
    the meanings of the terms it uses. For example, if a document uses the word
    awful, they have to decide whether it expresses the modern meaning '
    terrible' or the historical meaning 'worthy of awe'.^[40]
 9. ↑ This becomes particularly challenging if different sources provide
    seemingly contradictory information.^[42]
10. ↑ The creativity and imagination needed for this step is one of the reasons
    why some theorists understand history as an art rather than a science.^[43]
11. ↑ For example, Martha Washington burned all private letters between her and
    her husband George Washington, leaving decades worth of silences on their
    relationship.^[50] Another cause of silences, the existence of a taboo,
    such as a taboo against homosexuality, can have the effect that little
    information on the topic is recorded.^[49]
12. ↑ There are disagreements about when exactly each period starts and ends.
    Alternative subdivisions may use overlapping or radically different time
    frames.^[61]
13. ↑ New diseases and European military aggression and exploitation had severe
    consequences in the form of a drastic loss of life and cultural disruption
    among Indigenous communities in the Americas.^[71]
14. ↑ Emphasizing the central relation between geography and history, Jules
    Michelet (1798–1874) wrote in his 1833 book Histoire de France, "without
    geographical basis, the people, the makers of history, seem to be walking
    on air".^[77]
15. ↑ Herodotus is traditionally considered the "father of history" but has
    also been called the "father of lies" because not all of his accounts were
    reliable.^[141]
16. ↑ This aspect is also found to some degree in works of Greek historians,
    such as Polybius (c. 200–118 BCE).^[144]
17. ↑ Historical theory is a closely related term sometimes used as a synonym.^
    [181]
18. ↑ Some philosophers have followed Francis Fukuyama (1952–present) in
    arguing that the "end of history" has already arrived based on the claim
    that the ideological evolution of humanity has reached its endpoint.^[187]
19. ↑ The German historian Leopold Ranke was among the most important
    proponents of this scientific approach in the 19th century.^[193] Key
    modern scholars taking this view include Sir Geoffrey Elton, Arthur Marwick
    and E. P. Thompson.^[194]
20. ↑ These critiques rest on arguments including that: it is impossible to
    recover the totality of the past; as events have already passed, accounts
    cannot be verified against events but against other accounts; historical
    writing is mediated and constructed by the historian and the process of
    narrative construction involves interpretation and selective readings;^[195
    ] and evidence itself is necessarily subjective as its content is mediated
    through its maker and its survival through processes of selection.^[196]
    From this viewpoint, hindsight and modern theorising also allow historians
    to piece together evidence and put forward interpretations that "can only
    be seen in retrospect" and do so from a biased perspective, meaning that
    the "the known past (history) is an artefact of ours".^[197]
21. ↑ Among the proponnents of the more relativist viewpoint was E. H. Carr,
    whose What Is History? (1961) examined the "influence of the historical and
    social environment on the selection and interpretation of facts by the
    historian".^[200]
22. ↑ Some scholars argue that recognising the subjective nature of historical
    sources has the benefit of opening up new areas of research and new ways of
    engaging with historical subjects; it also provides new approaches for
    analysing sources, critiquing dominant narratives, and allowing historians
    to engage with different concepts.^[202]
23. ↑ Scholars advocating for this view include Richard J. Evans.^[203]

Citations

 1. ↑ 
      □ Kragh 1987, p. 41
      □ Little 2020, § 1. History and its representation
      □ Collingwood 1967, § 4. History and the Philosophy of History
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 193–194
 2. ↑
      □ Little 2020, § 1. History and its representation
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 140–143
      □ Munslow 2001
      □ Evans 2001
 3. ↑
      □ Tucker 2011, pp. xii, 2
      □ Arnold 2000, p. 5
      □ Evans 2002, pp. 1–2
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 193–194
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 140–143
 4. ↑
      □ Evans 2002, pp. 1–2
      □ Ritter 1986, p. 196
 5. ↑
      □ Tucker 2011, pp. xii, 2
      □ Arnold 2000, p. 5
 6. ↑ Kipfer 2000, pp. 457–458
 7. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, p. 300
      □ Renfrew 2008, p. 172
 8. ↑
      □ Fagan & Durrani 2016, p. 4
      □ Ackermann et al. 2008, p. xvii
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 17–18
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, pp. v, 1
 9. ↑ Hesketh 2023, pp. 1–4
10. ↑
      □ Arnold 2000, pp. 114–115
      □ Parrott & Hake 1983, pp. 121–122
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 50–52
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 196–197
11. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 50–52
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 196–197, 415–416
12. 1 2
      □ Allchin 2004, pp. 179–180
      □ Välimäki & Aali 2020, p. 57
13. ↑
      □ Southgate 2005, pp. xi–xii, 1, 57
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 50–52
14. ↑
      □ Arnold 2000, pp. 120–121
      □ Southgate 2005, pp. 11–12, 57–58
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 26, 50–52
15. ↑
      □ Arnold 2000, pp. 121–122
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 50–52
16. ↑
      □ Arnold 2000, p. 121
      □ Southgate 2005, pp. 38–39, 175–176
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 50–51
17. ↑
      □ Jenkins 1995, p. 53
      □ Haviland 1997, p. 6
18. ↑ Evans 2002, p. 2
19. ↑ Southgate 2005, pp. xi–xii 49–51, 175–176
20. ↑
      □ Tucker 2008, pp. 1–10
      □ Evans 1999, pp. 238–243
      □ Buchanan 2010
      □ Fronza 2018, p. 4
21. ↑ Woolf 2019, p. 22
22. ↑
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 193–195
      □ Stevenson 2010, p. 831
      □ HarperCollins 2022
      □ Joseph & Janda 2008, p. 163
      □ HarperCollins 2003, p. 99
      □ OED Staff 2024
23. ↑
      □ HarperCollins 2022
      □ Joseph & Janda 2008, p. 163
      □ Stevenson 2010, p. 831
24. ↑
      □ Joseph & Janda 2008, p. 163
      □ Hoad 1993, p. 217
      □ Cresswell 2021, § History
      □ OED Staff 2024
25. ↑ Ritter 1986, pp. 195–196
26. ↑
      □ Berkhofer 2022, pp. 10–11
      □ Tosh 2002, p. 141
27. ↑ Ritter 1986, p. 268
28. ↑
      □ Fazal 2023, p. 140
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 1–2
      □ Ahlskog 2020, pp. 1–2
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, pp. 9–10
      □ Ritter 1986, p. 268
29. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, pp. 19–20
      □ Bhat 2019, p. 203
30. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, p. 35
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 57–58
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 143–144
31. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, p. 36
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 54–58
      □ Storey 2013, p. 32
32. ↑ Arnold 2000, pp. 59–60
33. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, p. 37
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 57–58
34. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, p. 37
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 57–59
35. ↑ Tosh 2002, p. 57
36. ↑ Tosh 2002, pp. 56–57
37. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, pp. 40–45
      □ Arnold 2000, pp. 59–60
      □ Tosh 2002, p. 56
38. ↑ Tosh 2002, p. 87
39. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, pp. 70–71
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 59, 87–88
      □ Topolski 2012, p. 432
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 84–86
40. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 90–91
      □ Gil & Marsen 2022, p. 24
41. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, pp. 70–71
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 59, 87–88, 91–92
      □ Topolski 2012, p. 432
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 84–86
42. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 140, 171
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, p. 71
43. ↑ Tosh 2002, p. 141
44. ↑
      □ Berkhofer 2008, pp. 49–50
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 139–143
45. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 142–143
      □ Little 2020, § 1. History and its representation
46. ↑ Tosh 2002, p. 140
47. ↑ Wright 2006
48. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, p. 78
      □ Lucas 2004, pp. 50–51
      □ Christian 2015, pp. 5–6
49. 1 2 Kamp et al. 2020, pp. 77–78
50. ↑ Oberg 2019, p. 17
51. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 244–245
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 81, 92–93
52. ↑
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 13–14, 88
      □ Berkhofer 2008, pp. 49–50
      □ Lloyd 2011, pp. 371–372
53. ↑
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, p. 13
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 166, 185
54. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 22, 185
      □ Berkhofer 2008, pp. 45, 78
55. ↑
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 13–14
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 27, 224–225
56. ↑
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 110–111
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 121, 133
57. ↑
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 113–114
      □ Tosh 2002, p. 238
58. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 108–109
      □ Lemon 1995, p. 112
      □ Jordanova 2000, pp. 34–35
      □ Veysey 1979, p. 1
59. ↑
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, p. 78
      □ Christian 2008, pp. 97–99
      □ Jordanova 2000, p. 34
60. ↑
      □ Van Nieuwenhuyse 2020, p. 375
      □ Christian 2008, pp. 98–99
      □ Stearns 2001, Table of Contents
      □ Christian 2015, p. 7
61. ↑
      □ Christian 2015, pp. 5–7
      □ Northrup 2015, pp. 110–111
62. ↑
      □ Christian 2015, pp. 5–6
      □ Northrup 2015, pp. 110–111
63. ↑
      □ Hsu 1993, p. 161
      □ Arcodia & Basciano 2021, p. xv
64. ↑ Northrup 2015, p. 111
65. ↑ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, pp. 27, 43–44
66. ↑
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, pp. 1, 10
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 17–20
      □ Aldenderfer 2011, p. 4
67. ↑
      □ Christian 2015, p. 2
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 17–20
      □ Wragg-Sykes 2016, pp. 195, 199, 211, 221
68. ↑
      □ Aldenderfer 2011, p. 1
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, p. v
69. ↑
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 19–32
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 1–2, 89–90
      □ Ackermann et al. 2008, pp. xxix–xxxix
70. ↑
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 33–36
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 193–194, 291–292
71. ↑
      □ Stearns 2010, p. 36
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, p. 401
72. ↑
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 36–39
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 401–402
73. ↑ Pozdnyakova et al. 2018, pp. 12
74. ↑
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 39–46
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 537–538, 677–678, 817–818
75. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 108–109
      □ Jordanova 2000, pp. 34, 46–47
76. ↑
      □ Diamond 1999, pp. 22, 25–32
      □ Darby 2002, p. 14
      □ Baker 2003, p. 23
      □ Jordanova 2000, pp. 34, 46–47
77. ↑ Darby 2002, p. 14
78. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 108–109
      □ Jordanova 2000, pp. 46–47
79. ↑ Ackermann et al. 2008, pp. 373–374
80. ↑
      □ Fisher 2014, p. 127
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, p. 12
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 17–20
81. ↑
      □ Iliffe 2007, p. 5
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 24–25
82. ↑ Asante 2024, p. 92
83. ↑
      □ Shillington 2018, pp. 93–94
      □ Iliffe 2007, pp. 2, 42–45
84. ↑
      □ Shillington 2018, p. 103
      □ Iliffe 2007, pp. 131–132
85. ↑ Iliffe 2007, pp. 193–195
86. ↑
      □ Shillington 2018, p. 417
      □ Iliffe 2007, pp. 242, 253, 260, 267–268
87. ↑
      □ Cotterell 2011, pp. 256–257
      □ Mason 2005, pp. 77–78
88. ↑
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, p. 15
      □ Headrick 2009, p. 6
      □ Wragg-Sykes 2016, p. 199
89. ↑
      □ Mason 2005, pp. 17–18
      □ Murphey & Stapleton 2019, pp. 10–13
      □ Cotterell 2011, pp. xiii, 3–4
      □ AASA 2011, pp. 3–4
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 24–25
90. ↑
      □ Cotterell 2011, pp. xiii–xiv
      □ AASA 2011, pp. 3–4
91. ↑
      □ Cotterell 2011, pp. 256–257
      □ Mason 2005, pp. 77–78
92. ↑
      □ Mason 2005, pp. 111–112, 167–168
      □ Murphey & Stapleton 2019, pp. 282–283
      □ Cotterell 2011, pp. xvii–xviii
      □ Rana 2012, pp. 13–14
93. ↑
      □ Murphey & Stapleton 2019, p. 445
      □ Mason 2005, p. 1
      □ Rana 2012, pp. 13–14
94. ↑ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, p. 12
95. ↑ Roberts 1997, § The Importance of the Classical Past, § The Greeks, § An
    Attempt to Summarize
96. ↑
      □ Roberts 1997, § The Importance of the Classical Past, § The Rise of
        Roman Power, § Empire
      □ Black 2021, § What is Europe?
97. ↑
      □ Roberts 1997, § Decline and Fall in the West, § Christiandom
      □ Black 2021, § What is Europe?
98. ↑
      □ Roberts 1997, § Launching Modern History 1500–1800
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 36–39
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 401–402
99. ↑
      □ Roberts 1997, § The European Age
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 39–42
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 677–678
100. ↑
      □ Roberts 1997, § Europe's Twentieth Century: The Era of European Civil
        War
      □ Stearns 2010, p. 44
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 677–678
101. ↑
      □ Roberts 1997, § Europe in the Cold War and After, § European
        Integration
      □ Alcock 2002, pp. 266–268
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 39–46
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 677–678, 817–818
      □ Andrén 2022, pp. 298, 304
102. ↑
      □ Fisher 2014, p. 127
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, p. 12
103. ↑
      □ Ackermann et al. 2008, pp. xvii–xix
      □ Fernández-Armesto 2003, § Between Colonizations: The Americas' First
        'Normalcy'
      □ Dorling Kindersley 2018, pp. 94–95
104. ↑
      □ Fernández-Armesto 2003, § Between Colonizations: The Americas' First
        'Normalcy'
      □ Dorling Kindersley 2018, pp. 94–95
105. ↑
      □ Fernández-Armesto 2003, § Colonial Americas: Divergence and its Limits,
        § The Independence Era
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 36–38
      □ Dorling Kindersley 2018, p. 95
106. ↑
      □ Fernández-Armesto 2003, § The Independence Era
      □ Raab & Rinke 2019, p. 20
107. ↑
      □ Fernández-Armesto 2003, § The American Century
      □ Bulliet et al. 2015, pp. 817–818
108. ↑
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, p. 12
      □ Lawson 2024, p. 57
      □ d'Arcy 2012, § Indigenous Exploration and Colonization of the Region
109. ↑
      □ Lawson 2024, pp. 32, 57
      □ d'Arcy 2012, § Indigenous Exploration and Colonization of the Region
110. ↑
      □ Lawson 2024, pp. 59–60, 85–86
      □ d'Arcy 2012, § The Intersection of European and Indigenous Worlds, §
        The Impact of Pre-Colonial European Influences, § European Settler
        Societies and Plantation Colonies
111. ↑
      □ d'Arcy 2012, § Times of Anxiety: World Wars, Pandemic, and Economic
        Depression, § Post-War Themes: The Nuclear Pacific, Decolonization, and
        the Search for Identity
      □ Lawson 2024, pp. xii, 2, 96
112. ↑
      □ Jordanova 2000, pp. 34–35
      □ Yurdusev 2003, p. 24
      □ Tosh 2002, p. 109
      □ Gardiner 1988, pp. 1–3
113. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 109, 122
      □ Jordanova 2000, pp. 34–35
      □ Gardiner 1988, pp. 1–3
114. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 109–110
      □ Jordanova 2000, pp. 35–36
115. ↑ Tosh 2002, p. 110
116. ↑ Devries 2004
117. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 112–113
      □ Watt et al. 1988, pp. 131–133
118. ↑
      □ Howard et al. 1988, pp. 4–5
      □ Morillo 2017, § 1. An Introduction to Military History
119. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 122–124
      □ Coleman et al. 1988, pp. 31–32
120. ↑
      □ Samuel et al. 1988, pp. 48–51
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 125–127
      □ Stearns 2021
121. ↑
      □ Collinson et al. 1988, pp. 58–59
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 101, 236–237, 286
      □ Burke 2019, § Introduction
122. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 272–273
      □ Collini et al. 1988, pp. 105–106, 109–110
123. ↑
      □ Santinello & Piaia 2010, pp. 487–488
      □ Verene 2008, pp. 6–8
124. ↑
      □ Porter et al. 1988, pp. 78–79
      □ Williams 2024, § Lead section
125. ↑ Potts et al. 1988, pp. 96–104
126. ↑ Hughes 2016, p. 1
127. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 101, 112–113, 124–125, 127, 129
      □ Yapp et al. 1988, pp. 155, 158
      □ Antonellos & Rantall 2017, p. 115
      □ Buchanan 2024, Lead section
      □ Ramsay 2008, p. 283
128. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 244–245
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 81, 92–93
      □ Zaagsma 2023, § Introduction
      □ Jordanova 2000, pp. 49–50
129. ↑ Wong 2005, pp. 416–417
130. ↑
      □ Sitton, Mehaffy & Davis 2011, p. 4
      □ Abrams 2016, 2. The Peculiarities of Oral History
      □ Miller 2024, pp. 157–158
      □ Thomson 2012, p. 80
131. ↑
      □ Zhao 2023, pp. 9–10
      □ Birke, Butter & Köppe 2011, p. 7
132. ↑
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 13–14, 113–114
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 27, 224–225, 238
      □ Veysey 1979, p. 1
133. ↑
      □ Christian 2015, p. 3
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 11–13, 17–20
134. ↑ Hesketh 2023, pp. 1–4
135. ↑
      □ Christian 2015, p. 3
      □ Stearns 2010, pp. 11–13, 17–20
136. ↑
      □ Bod 2013, p. 260
      □ O'Hara 2019, p. 176
137. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 113–115
      □ De Armond 2023, p. 75
138. ↑
      □ Glassberg 1996, pp. 7–8
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. xiv–xv
      □ Stanton 2017, p. 224
139. ↑
      □ Fagan & Durrani 2019, § Written Records, Oral History, and Archaeology
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 1–3, 295
140. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 20–21
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Lefkowitz 2008, pp. 353–354
141. ↑ Woolf 2019, pp. 22–23
142. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 21–23
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Jensen, § 1. Ancient through Medieval
      □ Lefkowitz 2008, pp. 354–355
143. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 23–24
      □ Jensen, § 1. Ancient through Medieval
      □ Lefkowitz 2008, p. 356
144. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, p. 26
      □ Comber 2006, p. 39
145. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 28–30
      □ Comber 2006, pp. 38–40
146. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 40–41
      □ Lo 1998
147. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 35–39, 41–42
      □ Morgan 2006, pp. 14–15
148. ↑
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 39–43
149. ↑
      □ Vašíček 2008, pp. 33–34
      □ Bayly 2006, pp. 664–665
      □ Singh 2008, pp. 18–19
150. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 49–50
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Breisach 2005, § Christian Traditional Historiography
151. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 49–52, 55
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Breisach 2005, § Christian Traditional Historiography
152. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 56–57
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Breisach 2005, § Islamic Traditional Historiography
      □ Morgan 2006, pp. 9–10
153. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 57, 60
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Breisach 2005, § Islamic Traditional Historiography
      □ Morgan 2006, pp. 11, 14
154. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 64–65
      □ Breisach 2005, § Chinese Traditional Historiography
155. ↑ Woolf 2019, pp. 68–69, 84
156. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 67–68
      □ Breisach 2005, § Japanese Traditional Historiography
157. ↑ Woolf 2019, p. 84
158. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 89, 124
      □ Breisach 2005, § The Age of Anthropocentric Historiography
      □ Jensen, § 2. Humanism through Renaissance
159. ↑
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 129–130, 134, 166–167
160. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 99–100
      □ Mittag 2012, pp. 27–28
      □ Ng 2012, pp. 60–62
161. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 101–106
      □ Quinn 2020, pp. 1–4, 8–10
162. ↑ Woolf 2019, pp. 5, 106–114
163. ↑
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 176–177
164. ↑
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 174–177
      □ Jensen, § 5. 19th Century Scientific Historiography
      □ Moloughney & Zarrow 2012, p. 2
165. ↑
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Jensen, § 5. 19th Century Scientific Historiography
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 184–185
166. ↑
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 187–189
      □ Jensen, § 4. 19th Century Teleological Systems
167. ↑ Woolf 2019, pp. 5–6, 196–197, 215–216
168. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 216–217, 279–280
      □ Wright 2006
169. ↑
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 229–230
170. ↑ Woolf 2019, pp. 239–240, 242–243
171. ↑
      □ Wright 2006
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 232, 247–249, 255–256
172. ↑ Woolf 2019, pp. 262–264, 268–269
173. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 251–252
      □ Collini et al. 1988, pp. 105–107
174. ↑
      □ Moore 2006, pp. 918–919
      □ Woolf 2019, pp. 6, 297–300
      □ Wright 2006
175. ↑ Woolf 2019, p. 60
176. ↑
      □ Woolf 2019, p. 3
      □ Tucker 2011, pp. xii, 2
      □ Ritter 1986, pp. 188–189
      □ Little 2020, § 4. Historiography and the Philosophy of History
177. ↑
      □ Little 2020, § 4. Historiography and the Philosophy of History
      □ Lloyd 2011, pp. 371, 374
178. ↑
      □ Little 2020, § 4. Historiography and the Philosophy of History
      □ Cheng 2012, pp. 1–2
179. ↑
      □ Howell & Prevenier 2001, pp. 110–111
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 121, 133
      □ Little 2020, § 4. Historiography and the Philosophy of History
180. ↑
      □ Little 2020, § 4. Historiography and the Philosophy of History
      □ Bentley 2006, pp. xi, xv
      □ Cheng 2012, pp. 1–2
181. ↑ Paul 2015, pp. xv, 2–3, 12–13
182. ↑
      □ Carr 2006, Lead section
      □ Jensen, Lead section
      □ Little 2020, Lead section, § 1. History and its representation
      □ Paul 2015, p. 10
183. ↑
      □ Little 2020, Lead section, § 1. History and its representation
      □ Paul 2015, p. 10
184. ↑
      □ Stanford 1998, pp. 85–87
      □ Little 2020, § 3.3 Causation in history
185. ↑
      □ Carr 2006, § 2. "Critical" Philosophy of History: Philosophical
        Reflection on Historical Knowledge
      □ Little 2020, § 3.1 General laws in history?, § 3.3 Causation in history
186. ↑
      □ Little 2020, § 2.2 Does history possess directionality?
      □ Stanford 1998, pp. 74–75
      □ Paul 2015, p. 10
187. ↑
      □ Lemon 2003, pp. 390–391
      □ Jackson & Xidias 2017, p. 21
188. ↑
      □ Little 2020, § 4. Historiography and the philosophy of history
      □ Heller 2016, § 14. The Specificity of Philosophy of History
189. ↑
      □ Lemon 2003, p. 125
      □ Stanford 1998, p. 155
      □ Carr 2006, § 4. Historicity, Historicism and the Historicization of
        Philosophy
      □ Vision 2023, § VI Truth Epistemologized: 6. Historicism
190. ↑
      □ Little 2020, § 3.2 Historical objectivity
      □ Carr 2006, § 2. "Critical" Philosophy of History: Philosophical
        Reflection on Historical Knowledge
      □ Stanford 1998, pp. 50–53
      □ Paul 2015, p. 10
      □ Carr 1990, pp. 7–8, 21–22
      □ Evans 1999, pp. 1–4
191. ↑ Donnelly & Norton 2012, pp. 35–39
192. ↑ Jenkins 2003, pp. 16–18
193. ↑ Donnelly & Norton 2012, pp. 35–36
194. ↑ Jenkins 2003, pp. 16–18
195. ↑ Jenkins 2003, pp. 12–15
196. ↑
      □ Carr 1990, pp. 16–19
      □ Donnelly & Norton 2012, pp. 112–113
197. ↑ Jenkins 2003, p. 15
198. ↑ Kragh 1987, pp. 56–57
199. ↑
      □ Kragh 1987, pp. 58–60
      □ Tucker 2008, pp. 3–4
200. ↑ Davies 1990, p. 160
201. ↑ Donnelly & Norton 2012, p. 100
202. ↑ Summerfield 2019, § Introduction
203. 1 2 Donnelly & Norton 2012, pp. 104–106
204. ↑ Metzger & Harris 2018, p. 2
205. ↑
      □ Hughes, Cox & Godard 2013, pp. 4–5, 10–11
      □ Metzger & Harris 2018, p. 3
      □ Levstik & Thornton 2018, pp. 476–477
      □ Cooper 1995, pp. 3–4
206. ↑
      □ Levstik & Thornton 2018, p. 477
      □ Cooper 1995, pp. 110–112
207. ↑
      □ Sharp et al. 2021, pp. 66–67, 71
      □ Hunt 2006, p. 49
      □ Phillips 2008, pp. 34, 48–50
208. ↑
      □ van Hover & Hicks 2018, pp. 407–408
      □ Metzger & Harris 2018, pp. 6–7
      □ Hunt 2006, p. 36
      □ Grant 2018, pp. 422–428
209. ↑
      □ Metzger & Harris 2018, p. 6
      □ Cooper 1995, p. 2
210. ↑
      □ Metzger & Harris 2018, pp. 3, 6–7
      □ Sharp et al. 2021, p. 49
      □ Hunt 2006, pp. 6–7
211. ↑
      □ Sharp et al. 2021, p. 49
      □ Zajda 2015, pp. 5–6
212. ↑
      □ Girard & Harris 2018, p. 258
      □ Schneider 2008, pp. 107–108
213. 1 2
      □ Stoddard 2018, pp. 631–632
      □ Clark & Grever 2018, p. 181
214. ↑
      □ Clark & Grever 2018, pp. 181, 184
      □ Korte & Paletschek 2014, pp. 7–8
215. ↑
      □ Leavy 2011, p. 4
      □ Abrams 2016, 2. The Peculiarities of Oral History
216. ↑
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, p. v
      □ Kamp et al. 2020, p. 36
      □ Manning 2020, pp. 1–2
      □ Norberg & Deutsch 2023, p. 15
      □ Aldenderfer 2011, p. 1
217. ↑
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, pp. v, 1, 15
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 11, 55
218. ↑ Gaskell & Carter 2020, pp. 1–5
219. ↑ Manning 2020, pp. 2–3
220. ↑
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, pp. 4, 10, 13–16
      □ Relethford 2012, p. 237
221. ↑
      □ Tuniz & Vipraio 2016, pp. v, 1, 11, 19
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 34, 205
222. ↑
      □ Tosh 2002, pp. 90, 186–187
      □ Lewis 2012, § The Disciplines of Space and Time
223. ↑ Manning 2020, p. 3
224. ↑
      □ Southgate 2005, pp. xi, 21
      □ Arnold 2000, p. 121
      □ White & Millett 2019, p. 419
225. ↑
      □ Wiles 1978, pp. 4–6
      □ Johnson 2024, § 10. Historiography and History
      □ Law 2012, p. 1
226. ↑
      □ Porter et al. 1988, pp. 78–79
      □ Verene 2008, pp. 6–8
      □ Potts et al. 1988, pp. 96–104

Sources

  • Association of Academies of Sciences in Asia (AASA) (2011). Towards a
    Sustainable Asia: The Cultural Perspectives. China Science Publishing &
    Media and Springer Science+Business Media. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-16669-3.
    ISBN 978-7-03-029011-3.
  • Abrams, Lynn (2016). Oral History Theory (2nd ed.). Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-317-27798-9.
  • Ackermann, Marsha E.; Schroeder, Michael J.; Terry, Janice J.; Upshur,
    Jiu-Hwa Lo; Whitters, Mark F., eds. (2008). Encyclopedia of World History
    1: The Ancient World, Prehistoric Eras to 600 CE. Facts on File. ISBN 
    978-0-8160-6386-4.
  • Ahlskog, Jonas (2020). The Primacy of Method in Historical Research:
    Philosophy of History and the Perspective of Meaning. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-000-28524-6.
  • Alcock, A. (2002). A Short History of Europe: From the Greeks and Romans to
    the Present Day. Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1057/9780230597426. ISBN 
    978-0-230-59742-6.
  • Aldenderfer, Mark (2011). "Era 1: Beginnings of Human Society to 4000 BCE".
    World History Encyclopedia. Vol. 2. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 1–327.
    ISBN 978-1-85109-930-6.
  • Allchin, Douglas (2004). "Pseudohistory and Pseudoscience". Science &
    Education. 13 (3): 179–195. Bibcode:2004Sc&Ed..13..179A. doi:10.1023/
    B:SCED.0000025563.35883.e9.
  • Andrén, Mats (2022). Thinking Europe: A History of the European Idea since
    1800. Vol. 46. Berghahn Books. ISBN 978-1-80073-570-5. JSTOR j.ctv36cj83p.
  • Antonellos, Steven; Rantall, Jayne (2017). "Indigenous History: A
    Conversation". Australasian Journal of American Studies. 36 (2): 115–128.
    JSTOR 26532936.
  • Arcodia, Giorgio Francesco; Basciano, Bianca (2021). "Periodization of
    Chinese History". Chinese Linguistics: An Introduction. Oxford University
    Press. p. xv. doi:10.1093/oso/9780198847830.001.0001. ISBN 
    978-0-19-884783-0.
  • Arnold, John (2000). History: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University
    Press. doi:10.1093/actrade/9780192853523.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-285352-3.
  • Asante, Molefi Kete (2024). The History of Africa: The Quest for Eternal
    Harmony (4 ed.). Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781003351306. ISBN 
    978-1-003-81615-7.
  • Baker, Alan R. H. (2003). Geography and History: Bridging the Divide.
    Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-28885-9.
  • Bayly, C. A. (2006). "Modern Indian Historiography". In Bentley, Michael
    (ed.). Companion to Historiography. Routledge. pp. 663–677. doi:10.4324/
    9780203991459. ISBN 978-1-134-97023-0.
  • Bentley, Michael (2006). "General Introduction: The Project of
    Historiography". In Bentley, Michael (ed.). Companion to Historiography.
    Routledge. pp. xi–xvi. doi:10.4324/9780203991459. ISBN 978-1-134-97023-0.
  • Berkhofer, R. (2008). Fashioning History: Current Practices and Principles.
    Springer. doi:10.1057/9780230617209. ISBN 978-0-230-61720-9.
  • Berkhofer, Robert F. (2022). Forgeries and Historical Writing in England,
    France, and Flanders, 900–1200. Boydell Press. doi:10.2307/j.ctv24tr8rg.
    ISBN 978-1-78327-691-2. JSTOR j.ctv24tr8rg.
  • Bhat, P. Ishwara (2019). "Historical Legal Research". Idea and Methods of
    Legal Research. Oxford University Press India. pp. 198–229. doi:10.1093/oso
    /9780199493098.003.0007. ISBN 978-0-19-909830-9.
  • Birke, Dorothee; Butter, Michael; Köppe, Tilmann (2011). "Introduction".
    Counterfactual Thinking - Counterfactual Writing. de Gruyter. pp. 1–11. doi
    :10.1515/9783110268669 (inactive 10 March 2025). ISBN 978-3-11-026866-9.{{
    cite book}}: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of March 2025 (link)
  • Black, Jeremy (2021). A History of Europe: From Pre-History to the 21st
    Century. Arcturus Publishing. ISBN 978-1-3988-0986-4.
  • Bod, Rens (2013). A New History of the Humanities: The Search for
    Principles and Patterns from Antiquity to the Present. Oxford University
    Press. ISBN 978-0-19-966521-1.
  • Breisach, Ernst (2005). "Historiography: An Overview". In Jones, Lindsay
    (ed.). Encyclopedia of Religion (2nd ed.). Macmillan Reference. pp. 4024–
    4035. ISBN 978-0-02-865981-7.
  • Buchanan, Ian (2010). "Revisionism". A Dictionary of Critical Theory.
    Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-953291-9.
  • Buchanan, Robert Angus (2024). "History of Technology". Encyclopædia
    Britannica. Retrieved 25 November 2024.
  • Bulliet, Richard; Crossley, Pamela; Headrick, Daniel; Hirsch, Steven;
    Johnson, Lyman; Northrup, David (2015). The Earth and Its Peoples: A Global
    History. Vol. 1 (6th ed.). Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-1-285-44567-0.
    Archived from the original on 29 April 2024. Retrieved 25 August 2022.
  • Burke, Peter (2019). What Is Cultural History? (3 ed.). John Wiley & Sons.
    ISBN 978-1-5095-2224-8.
  • Carr, Edward Hallett (1990) [1961]. What Is History? (2 ed.). Penguin. ISBN
     978-0-14-013584-8.
  • Carr, David (2006). "Philosophy of History". In Borchert, Donald M. (ed.).
    Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 7: Oakeshott - Presupposition (2 ed.). Thomson
    Gale, Macmillan Reference. pp. 386–399. ISBN 978-0-02-865787-5.
  • Cheng, Eileen Ka-May (2012). Historiography: An Introductory Guide.
    Continuum. ISBN 978-1-4411-7767-4.
  • Christian, David (2008). This Fleeting World: A Short History of Humanity.
    Berkshire Publishing. ISBN 978-1-933782-04-1.
  • Christian, David (2015). "Introduction and Overview". In Christian, David
    (ed.). The Cambridge World History. Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. pp.
     1–38. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139194662. ISBN 978-0-521-76333-2.
  • Clark, Anna; Grever, Maria (2018). "Historical Consciousness". In Metzger,
    Scott Alan; Harris, Lauren McArthur (eds.). The Wiley International
    Handbook of History Teaching and Learning. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 177–201.
    doi:10.1002/9781119100812.ch7. ISBN 978-1-119-10081-2.
  • Coleman, D. C.; Floud, Roderick; Barker, T. C.; Daunton, M. J.; Crafts, N.
    F. R. (1988). "What Is Economic History … ?". What Is History Today ... ?.
    Macmillan Education UK. pp. 31–41. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-19161-1_4. ISBN 
    978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Collingwood, R. G. (1967). "The Nature and Aims of a Philosophy of History"
    . Essays in the Philosophy of History. University of Texas Press. pp. 34–
    56. ISBN 978-1-5287-6685-2.
  • Collini, Stefan; Skinner, Quentin; Hollinger, David A.; Pocock, J. G. A.;
    Hunter, Michael (1988). "What Is Intellectual History … ?". What Is History
    Today … ?. Macmillan Education UK. pp. 105–119. doi:10.1007/
    978-1-349-19161-1_10. ISBN 978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Collinson, Patrick; Brooke, Christopher; Norman, Edward; Lake, Peter;
    Hempton, David (1988). "What Is Religious History … ?". What Is History
    Today … ?. Macmillan Education UK. pp. 58–68. doi:10.1007/
    978-1-349-19161-1_6. ISBN 978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Comber, Michael (2006). "Re-reading the Roman Historians". In Bentley,
    Michael (ed.). Companion to Historiography. Routledge. pp. 38–52. ISBN 
    978-1-134-97023-0.
  • Cooper, Hilary (1995). History in the Early Years. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-0-415-10100-4.
  • Cotterell, Arthur (2011). Asia: A Concise History. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 
    978-0-470-82959-2.
  • Cresswell, Julia (2021). Oxford Dictionary of Word Origins (3rd ed.).
    Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-886875-0.
  • d'Arcy, Paul (2012). "Oceania and Australasia". In Bentley, Jerry H. (ed.).
    Oxford Handbook of World History. Oxford University Press. pp. 546–563. doi
    :10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199235810.013.0031. ISBN 978-0-19-923581-0.
  • Darby, Henry Clifford (2002). The Relations of History and Geography:
    Studies in England, France and the United States. University of Exeter
    Press. ISBN 978-0-85989-699-3.
  • Davies, R. W. (1990) [1961]. ""From E. H. Carr's Files: Notes towards a
    Second Edition of What Is History?". In Carr, Edward Hallett; Davies, R. W.
    (eds.). What Is History? (2 ed.). Penguin. pp. 157–184. ISBN 
    978-0-14-013584-8.
  • De Armond, Thea (2023). "Toward a Prosopography of Archaeology form the
    Margins". In Moshenska, Gabriel; Lewis, Clare (eds.). Life-writing in the
    History of Archaeology: Critical Perspectives. UCL Press. pp. 73–90. ISBN 
    978-1-80008-450-6.
  • Devries, Kelly (2004). "Catapult". In Bradford, James C. (ed.).
    International Encyclopedia of Military History. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-135-95033-0.
  • Diamond, Jared (1999). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies
    . W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-06922-8.
  • Donnelly, Mark; Norton, Claire (2012). Doing History. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-136-65694-1.
  • Dorling Kindersley (2018). Timelines of Everything: From Woolly Mammoths to
    World Wars. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0-241-42807-8.
  • Evans, Richard J. (1999). In Defence of History. W. W. Norton & Company.
    ISBN 0-393-04687-7.
  • Evans, Richard J. (2001). "The Two Faces of E. H. Carr". History in Focus
    (2). University of London - Institute of Historical Research.
  • Evans, Richard J. (2002). "Prologue: What Is History? – Now". In Cannadine,
    D. (ed.). What Is History Now?. Springer. pp. 1–18. doi:10.1057/
    9780230204522_1. ISBN 978-0-230-20452-2.
  • Fagan, Brian M.; Durrani, Nadia (2016). World Prehistory: A Brief
    Introduction (9th ed.). Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-317-27910-5.
  • Fagan, Brian M.; Durrani, Nadia (2019). World Prehistory: A Brief
    Introduction (10th ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-0-429-77280-1.
  • Fazal, Tanweer (2023). "'Documents of Power': Historical Method and the
    Study of Politics". Studies in Indian Politics. 11 (1): 140–149. doi:
    10.1177/23210230231166179.
  • Fernández-Armesto, Felipe (2003). The Americas: A Hemispheric History.
    Random House. ISBN 978-1-58836-302-2.
  • Fisher, Michael H. (2014). Migration: A World History. Oxford University
    Press. ISBN 978-0-19-976434-1.
  • Fronza, Emanuela (2018). Memory and Punishment: Historical Denialism, Free
    Speech and the Limits of Criminal Law. Springer. ISBN 978-94-6265-234-7.
  • Gardiner, Juliet (1988). "Introduction". What Is History Today … ?.
    Macmillan Education UK. pp. 1–3. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-19161-1_1. ISBN 
    978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Gaskell, Ivan; Carter, Sarah Anne (2020). "Introduction: Why History and
    Material Culture?". In Gaskell, Ivan; Carter, Sarah Anne (eds.). The Oxford
    Handbook of History and Material Culture. Oxford University Press. pp. 1–
    13. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199341764.002.0008 (inactive 9 March 2025).
    ISBN 978-0-19-934176-4.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of March
    2025 (link)
  • Gil, Jeffrey; Marsen, Sky (2022). Exploring Language in Global Contexts.
    Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-000-59387-7.
  • Girard, Brian; Harris, Lauren McArthur (2018). "Global and World History
    Education". In Metzger, Scott Alan; Harris, Lauren McArthur (eds.). The
    Wiley International Handbook of History Teaching and Learning. John Wiley &
    Sons. pp. 253–279. doi:10.1002/9781119100812.ch10. ISBN 978-1-119-10081-2.
  • Glassberg, David (1996). "Public History and the Study of Memory". The
    Public Historian. 18 (2): 7–23. doi:10.2307/3377910. JSTOR 3377910.
  • Grant, S. G. (2018). "Teaching Practices in History Education". In Metzger,
    Scott Alan; Harris, Lauren McArthur (eds.). The Wiley International
    Handbook of History Teaching and Learning. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 419–448.
    doi:10.1002/9781119100812.ch16. ISBN 978-1-119-10081-2.
  • HarperCollins (2003). Collins Latin Concise Dictionary. HarperCollins. ISBN
     978-0-06-053690-9.
  • HarperCollins (2022). "History". American Heritage Dictionary.
    HarperCollins. Retrieved 8 December 2024.
  • Haviland, Beverly (1997). Henry James' Last Romance: Making Sense of the
    Past and the American Scene. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 
    978-0-521-56338-3.
  • Headrick, Daniel R. (2009). Technology: A World History. Oxford University
    Press. ISBN 978-0-19-971366-0.
  • Heller, Agnes (2016). A Theory of History. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-317-26882-6.
  • Hesketh, Ian (2023). A History of Big History. Cambridge University Press.
    ISBN 978-1-009-04156-0.
  • Hoad, T. F. (1993). The Concise Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology.
    Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-283098-2.
  • Howard, Michael; Bond, Brian; Stagg, J. C. A.; Chandler, David; Best,
    Geoffrey; Terrine, John (1988). "What Is Military History … ?". What Is
    History Today … ?. Macmillan Education UK. pp. 4–17. doi:10.1007/
    978-1-349-19161-1_2. ISBN 978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Howell, Martha C.; Prevenier, Walter (2001). From Reliable Sources: An
    Introduction to Historical Methods. Cornell University Press. ISBN 
    978-0-8014-8560-2.
  • Hsu, Cho-yun (1993). "Chinese Periodization". In Stearns, Peter N. (ed.).
    Encyclopedia of Social History. Routledge. pp. 161–163. ISBN 
    978-1-135-58347-7.
  • Hughes, J. Donald (2016). What Is Environmental History?. Polity. ISBN 
    978-0-7456-8844-2.
  • Hughes, Pat; Cox, Kath; Godard, Gillian (2013). Primary History Curriculum
    Guide. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-12742-9.
  • Hunt, Martin (2006). "Why Learn History?". In Hunt, Martin (ed.). A
    Practical Guide to Teaching History in the Secondary School. Routledge. pp.
     3–14. doi:10.4324/9780203029831. ISBN 978-1-134-19967-9.
  • Iliffe, John (2007). Africans: The History of a Continent (2 ed.).
    Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86438-1.
  • Jackson, Ian; Xidias, Jason (2017). An Analysis of Francis Fukuyama's The
    End of History and the Last Man. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-35127-0.
  • Jenkins, Keith (1995). On 'What Is History?': From Carr and Elton to Rorty
    and White. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-09725-3.
  • Jenkins, Keith (2003). Rethinking History (3 ed.). Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-134-40828-3.
  • Jensen, Anthony K. "History, Philosophy of". Internet Encyclopedia of
    Philosophy. Retrieved 30 November 2024.
  • Johnson, Peter (2024). R. G. Collingwood and Christianity: Faith,
    Philosophy and Politics. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-350-46543-5.
  • Jordanova, Ludmilla (2000). History in Practice. Arnold Publishers. ISBN 
    978-0-340-66331-8.
  • Joseph, Brian; Janda, Richard (2008). "On Language, Change, and Language
    Change - Or, Of History, Linguistics, and Historical Linguistics". In
    Joseph, Brian; Janda, Richard (eds.). The Handbook of Historical
    Linguistics. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 3–180. doi:10.1002/9780470756393.ch.
    ISBN 978-0-470-75633-1.
  • Kamp, Jeannette; Legêne, Susan; Rossum, Matthias van; Rümke, Sebas (2020).
    Writing History!: A Companion for Historians. Amsterdam University Press.
    ISBN 978-90-485-3762-4.
  • Kipfer, Barbara Ann (2000). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Archaeology.
    Springer. ISBN 978-0-306-46158-3.
  • Korte, Barbara; Paletschek, Sylvia (2014). "Introduction". In Korte,
    Barbara; Paletschek, Sylvia (eds.). Popular History Now and Then:
    International Perspectives. transcript Verlag. pp. 7–12. ISBN 
    978-3-8394-2007-2.
  • Kragh, Helge (1987). An Introduction to the Historiography of Science.
    Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-38921-1.
  • Law, David R. (2012). The Historical-Critical Method: A Guide for the
    Perplexed. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-567-40012-3.
  • Lawson, Stephanie (2024). Regional Politics in Oceania: From Colonialism
    and Cold War to the Pacific Century. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 
    978-1-009-42758-6.
  • Leavy, Patricia (2011). Oral History: Understanding Qualitative Research.
    Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-539509-9.
  • Lefkowitz, Mary (2008). "Historiography and Myth". In Tucker, Aviezer
    (ed.). A Companion to the Philosophy of History and Historiography. John
    Wiley & Sons. pp. 353–361. doi:10.1002/9781444304916.ch31. ISBN 
    978-1-4443-0491-6.
  • Lemon, Michael C. (1995). The Discipline of History and the History of
    Thought. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-12346-4.
  • Lemon, M. C. (2003). Philosophy of History: A Guide for Students.
    Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-71746-0.
  • Levstik, Linda S.; Thornton, Stephen J. (2018). "Reconceptualizing History
    for Early Childhood Through Early Adolescence". In Metzger, Scott Alan;
    Harris, Lauren McArthur (eds.). The Wiley International Handbook of History
    Teaching and Learning. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 473–501. doi:10.1002/
    9781119100812.ch18. ISBN 978-1-119-10081-2.
  • Lewis, Martin W. (2012). Bentley, Jerry H. (ed.). Geographies. Oxford
    University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-923581-0.
  • Little, Daniel (2020). "Philosophy of History". The Stanford Encyclopedia
    of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 7
    November 2024.
  • Lloyd, Christopher (2011). "Historiographic Schools". In Tucker, Aviezer
    (ed.). A Companion to the Philosophy of History and Historiography. John
    Wiley & Sons. pp. 371–380. doi:10.1002/9781444304916.ch33. ISBN 
    978-1-4443-5152-1.
  • Lo, Yuet Keung (1998). "Sima Qian [Ssu-ma Ch'ien] (145–85 BC)". In Woolf,
    D.R. (ed.). A Global Encyclopedia of Historical Writing: K-Z. Vol. 2.
    Garland Publishing. p. 835. ISBN 978-0-8153-1514-8.
  • Lucas, Gavin (2004). The Archaeology of Time. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-134-38427-3.
  • Manning, Patrick (2020). Methods for Human History: Studying Social,
    Cultural, and Biological Evolution. Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-53882-8.
  • Mason, Colin (2005). A Short History of Asia (2 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan.
    ISBN 978-1-4039-3611-0.
  • Metzger, Scott Alan; Harris, Lauren McArthur (2018). "Introduction". In
    Metzger, Scott Alan; Harris, Lauren McArthur (eds.). The Wiley
    International Handbook of History Teaching and Learning. John Wiley & Sons.
    pp. 1–10. doi:10.1002/9781119100812.ch0. ISBN 978-1-119-10081-2.
  • Miller, Bruce Granville (2024). Oral History on Trial: Recognizing
    Aboriginal Narratives in the Courts. UBC Press. ISBN 978-0-7748-2073-8.
  • Mittag, Achim (2012). "Chinese Official Historical Writing under the Ming
    and Qing". In Rabasa, José; Sato, Masayuki; Tortarolo, Edoardo; Woolf,
    Daniel (eds.). The Oxford History of Historical Writing: Volume 3:
    1400-1800. Oxford University Press. pp. 24–42. doi:10.1093/acprof:osobl/
    9780199219179.003.0002. ISBN 978-0-19-162944-0.
  • Moloughney, Brian; Zarrow, Peter (2012). "Making History Modern: The
    Transformation of Chinese Historiography, 1895–1937". In Moloughney, Brian;
    Zarrow, Peter (eds.). Transforming History: The Making of a Modern Academic
    Discipline in Twentieth-Century China. The Chinese University of Hong Kong
    Press. ISBN 978-962-996-479-5.
  • Moore, R. I. (2006). "World History". In Bentley, Michael (ed.). Companion
    to Historiography. Routledge. pp. 918–936. ISBN 978-1-134-97023-0.
  • Morgan, David (2006). "The Evolution of Two Asian Historiographical
    Traditions". In Bentley, Michael (ed.). Companion to Historiography.
    Routledge. pp. 9–19. ISBN 978-1-134-97023-0.
  • Morillo, Stephen (2017). What Is Military History?. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN
     978-1-5095-1764-0.
  • Munslow, Alun (2001). "What History Is". History in Focus (2). University
    of London - Institute of Historical Research.
  • Murphey, Rhoads; Stapleton, Kristin (2019). A History of Asia. Routledge.
    ISBN 978-1-351-23189-3.
  • Ng, On-cho (2012). "Private Historiography in Late Imperial China". In
    Rabasa, José; Sato, Masayuki; Tortarolo, Edoardo; Woolf, Daniel (eds.). The
    Oxford History of Historical Writing: Volume 3: 1400-1800. Oxford
    University Press. pp. 60–79. doi:10.1093/acprof:osobl/
    9780199219179.003.0004. ISBN 978-0-19-162944-0.
  • Norberg, Matilda Baraibar; Deutsch, Lisa (2023). The Soybean Through World
    History: Lessons for Sustainable Agrofood Systems. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 
    978-1-000-90347-8.
  • Northrup, David R. (2015). "From Divergence to Convergence: Centrifugal and
    Centripetal Forces in History". In Christian, David (ed.). The Cambridge
    World History. Cambridge University Press. pp. 110–131. doi:10.1017/
    CBO9781139194662. ISBN 978-0-521-76333-2.
  • O'Hara, Phillip Anthony (2019). "History of Institutional Economics". In
    Sinha, Ajit; Thomas, Alex M. (eds.). Pluralistic Economics and Its History.
    Taylor & Francis. pp. 171–190. doi:10.4324/9780429278860-12. ISBN 
    978-1-000-00183-9.
  • Oberg, Barbara B. (2019). Women in the American Revolution: Gender,
    Politics, and the Domestic World. University of Virginia Press. ISBN 
    978-0-8139-4260-5.
  • OED Staff (2024). "History, n." Oxford English Dictionary Online. Oxford
    University Press. doi:10.1093/OED/9602520444.
  • Parrott, Linda J.; Hake, Don F. (1983). "Toward a Science of History". The
    Behavior Analyst. 6 (2): 121–132. doi:10.1007/BF03392391. PMC 2741978. PMID
     22478582.
  • Paul, Herman (2015). Key Issues in Historical Theory. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-138-80272-8.
  • Phillips, Ian (2008). Teaching History: Developing as a Reflective
    Secondary Teacher. Sage. ISBN 978-1-4462-4538-5.
  • Porter, Roy; Shapin, Steven; Schaffer, Simon; Young, Robert M.; Cooter,
    Roger; Crosland, Maurice (1988). "What Is the History of Science … ?". What
    Is History Today … ?. Macmillan Education UK. pp. 69–81. doi:10.1007/
    978-1-349-19161-1_7. ISBN 978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Potts, Alex; House, John; Hope, Charles; Gretton, Tom (1988). "What Is the
    History of Art … ?". What Is History Today … ?. Macmillan Education UK. pp.
     96–104. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-19161-1_9. ISBN 978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Pozdnyakova, Ulyana A.; Golikov, Vyacheslav V.; Peters, Irina A.; Morozova,
    Irina A. (2018). "Genesis of the Revolutionary Transition to Industry 4.0
    in the 21st Century and Overview of Previous Industrial Revolutions". In
    Popkova, Elena G.; Ragulina, Yulia V.; Bogoviz, Aleksei V. (eds.). Industry
    4.0: Industrial Revolution of the 21st Century. Springer. pp. 11–20. ISBN 
    978-3-319-94310-7.
  • Quinn, Sholeh A. (2020). Persian Historiography across Empires: The
    Ottomans, Safavids, and Mughals. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 
    978-1-108-90170-3.
  • Raab, Josef; Rinke, Stefan (2019). "Introduction: History and Society in
    the Americas from the 16th to the 19th Century. The Big Picure". In
    Kaltmeier, Olaf; Raab, Josef; Foley, Mike; Nash, Alice; Rinke, Stefan;
    Rufer, Mario (eds.). The Routledge Handbook to the History and Society of
    the Americas. Routledge. pp. 15–33. ISBN 978-1-351-13869-7.
  • Ramsay, John G. (2008). "Education, History of". In Provenzo, Eugene F.
    (ed.). Encyclopedia of the Social and Cultural Foundations of Education.
    Sage. pp. 283–288. ISBN 978-1-4522-6597-1. Retrieved 3 May 2023.
  • Rana, Pradumna B. (2012). "Regional Economic Integration in Asia:
    Historical and Contemporary Perspectives". In Rana, Pradumna B. (ed.).
    Renaissance Of Asia: Evolving Economic Relations Between South Asia And
    East Asia. World Scientific. pp. 13–50. doi:10.1142/9789814366519_0002.
    ISBN 978-981-4458-19-1.
  • Relethford, John H. (2012). Human Population Genetics. John Wiley & Sons.
    ISBN 978-0-470-46467-0.
  • Renfrew, Colin (2008). Prehistory: The Making of the Human Mind. Random
    House. ISBN 978-1-58836-808-9.
  • Ritter, Harry (1986). Dictionary of Concepts in History. Greenwood Press.
    ISBN 978-0-313-22700-4.
  • Roberts, J. (1997). The Penguin History of Europe. Penguin. ISBN 
    978-0-14-192509-7.
  • Samuel, Raphael; Breuilly, John; Clark, J. C. D.; Hopkins, Keith;
    Cannadine, David (1988). "What Is Social History … ?". What Is History
    Today … ?. Macmillan Education UK. pp. 42–57. doi:10.1007/
    978-1-349-19161-1_5. ISBN 978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Santinello, Giovanni; Piaia, Gregorio (1 December 2010). Models of the
    History of Philosophy: Volume II: From Cartesian Age to Brucker. Springer.
    ISBN 978-90-481-9507-7. Retrieved 25 May 2023.
  • Schneider, Claudia (2008). "The Japanese History Textbook Controversy in
    East Asian Perspective". The Annals of the American Academy of Political
    and Social Science. 617 (1): 107–122. doi:10.1177/0002716208314359.
  • Sharp, Heather; Dallimore, Jonathon; Bedford, Alison; Kerby, Martin;
    Goulding, James; Güttner, Darius von; Heath, Treesa Clare; Zarmati, Louise
    (2021). Teaching Secondary History. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 
    978-1-108-96998-7.
  • Shillington, Kevin (2018). History of Africa. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 
    978-1-137-52481-2.
  • Singh, Upinder (2008). A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From
    the Stone Age to the 12th Century. Pearson Education India. ISBN 
    978-81-317-1677-9.
  • Sitton, Thad; Mehaffy, George L.; Davis, O. L. (2011). Oral History: A
    Guide for Teachers (and Others). University of Texas Press. ISBN 
    978-0-292-78582-3.
  • Southgate, Beverley C. (2005). What Is History For?. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-0-415-35098-3.
  • Stanford, Michael (1998). An Introduction to the Philosophy of History.
    John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-631-19941-0.
  • Stanton, Cathy (2017). "Between Pastness and Presentism: Public History and
    Local Food Activism". In Gardner, James B.; Hamilton, Paula (eds.). The
    Oxford Handbook of Public History. Oxford University Press. pp. 217–238.
    doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199766024.013.12. ISBN 978-0-19-067378-9.
  • Stearns, Peter N. (2001). The Encyclopedia of World History: Ancient,
    Medieval, and Modern, Chronologically Arranged. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 
    978-0-395-65237-4.
  • Stearns, Peter N. (2010). World History: The Basics. Routledge. ISBN 
    978-1-136-88817-5.
  • Stearns, Peter N. (2021). "Social History". Oxford Bibliographies. doi:
    10.1093/obo/9780199756384-0131. ISBN 978-0-19-975638-4. Retrieved 24
    November 2024.
  • Stevenson, Angus (2010). Oxford Dictionary of English. Oxford University
    Press. ISBN 978-0-19-957112-3.
  • Stoddard, Jeremy D. (2018). "Learning History Beyond School". In Metzger,
    Scott Alan; Harris, Lauren McArthur (eds.). The Wiley International
    Handbook of History Teaching and Learning. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 631–656.
    doi:10.1002/9781119100812.ch24. ISBN 978-1-119-10081-2.
  • Storey, William Kelleher (2013). Writing History: A Guide for Students (4 
    ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-983004-6.
  • Summerfield, Penny (2019). Histories of the Self: Personal Narratives and
    Historical Practice. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-429-94529-8.
  • Thomson, Alistair (2012). "Memory and Remembering in Oral History". In
    Ritchie, Donald A. (ed.). The Oxford Handbook of Oral History. Oxford
    University Press. pp. 77–95. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195339550.001.0001.
    ISBN 978-0-19-999636-0.
  • Topolski, Y. (2012). Methodology of History. D. Reidel Publishing Company.
    ISBN 978-94-010-1123-5.
  • Tosh, John (2002). The Pursuit of History: Aims, Methods and New Directions
    in the Study of Modern History. Pearson Education. ISBN 978-0-582-77254-0.
  • Tucker, Aviezer (2008). "Historiographic Revision and Revisionism". In
    Kopeček, Michal (ed.). Past in the Making: Historical Revisionism in
    Central Europe After 1989. Central European University Press. pp. 1–16. doi
    :10.1515/9786155211423. ISBN 978-6-155-21142-3.
  • Tucker, Aviezer (2011). "Introduction". In Tucker, Aviezer (ed.). A
    Companion to the Philosophy of History and Historiography. John Wiley &
    Sons. pp. 1–6. doi:10.1002/9781444304916.ch1. ISBN 978-1-4443-5152-1.
  • Tuniz, Claudio; Vipraio, Patrizia Tiberi (2016). Humans: An Unauthorized
    Biography. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-31021-3. ISBN 978-3-319-31021-3.
  • Välimäki, Reima; Aali, Heta (2020). "The Ancient Finnish Kings and their
    Swedish Archenemy: Nationalism, Conspiracy Theories, and Alt-Right Memes in
    Finnish Online Medievalism". In Fugelso, Karl (ed.). Politics and
    Medievalism. Vol. 3. Boydell & Brewer. pp. 55–78. ISBN 978-1-84384-625-3.
    JSTOR j.ctv24cns6q.
  • van Hover, Stephanie; Hicks, David (2018). "History Teacher Preparation and
    Professional Development". In Metzger, Scott Alan; Harris, Lauren McArthur
    (eds.). The Wiley International Handbook of History Teaching and Learning.
    John Wiley & Sons. pp. 389–418. doi:10.1002/9781119100812.ch15. ISBN 
    978-1-119-10081-2.
  • Van Nieuwenhuyse, Karel (2020). "From Knowing the National Past to Doing
    History". In Berg, Christopher W.; Christou, Theodore M. (eds.). The
    Palgrave Handbook of History and Social Studies Education. Springer. pp. 
    355–386. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-37210-1_14. ISBN 978-3-030-37210-1.
  • Vašíček, Zdeněk (2008). "Philosophy of History". In Tucker, Aviezer (ed.).
    A Companion to the Philosophy of History and Historiography. John Wiley &
    Sons. pp. 26–43. doi:10.1002/9781444304916.ch3. ISBN 978-1-4443-0491-6.
  • Verene, Donald Phillip (20 June 2008). The History of Philosophy: A
    Reader's Guide. Northwestern University Press. ISBN 978-0-8101-5197-0.
    Retrieved 25 May 2023.
  • Veysey, Laurence (1979). "The 'New' Social History in the Context of
    American Historical Writing". Reviews in American History. 7 (1): 1–12. doi
    :10.2307/2700953. JSTOR 2700953.
  • Vision, Gerald A. (2023). Modern Anti-Realism and Manufactured Truth.
    Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-003-80838-1.
  • Watt, D. C.; Adams, Simon; Bullen, Roger; Brauer, Kinley; Iriye, Akira
    (1988). "What Is Diplomatic History … ?". What Is History Today … ?.
    Macmillan Education UK. pp. 131–142. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-19161-1_12. ISBN
     978-1-349-19161-1.
  • White, W. George; Millett, Bruce (2019). Kobayashi, Audrey (ed.).
    International Encyclopedia of Human Geography. Elsevier. pp. 419–426. ISBN 
    978-0-08-102296-2.
  • Wiles, Maurice (1978). "In What Sense is Christianity a 'Historical'
    Religion?". Theology. 81 (679): 4–14. doi:10.1177/0040571X7808100102.
  • Williams, L. Pearce (2024). "History of Science". Encyclopædia Britannica.
    Retrieved 24 November 2024.
  • Wong, R. Bin (2005). "Comparative History". Berkshire Encyclopedia of World
    History. Berkshire Publishing. pp. 630–635. ISBN 978-0-9743091-0-1. JSTOR 
    jj.9941129.
  • Woolf, Daniel (2019). A Concise History of History: Global Historiography
    from Antiquity to the Present. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 
    978-1-108-42619-0.
  • Wragg-Sykes, Rebecca (2016). "Threshold 6". Big History: Our Incredible
    Journey, from Big Bang to Now. Dorling Kindersley. pp. 180–223. ISBN 
    978-0-241-22590-5. Retrieved 4 May 2024.
  • Wright, Edmund, ed. (2006). "Historiography". A Dictionary of World History
    . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280700-7.
  • Yapp, M. E.; Bayly, C. A.; Clarence-Smith, Gervase; Abel, Christopher;
    Johnson, Gordon; Fyfe, Christopher (1988). "What Is Third World History … ?
    ". What Is History Today … ?. Macmillan Education UK. pp. 155–167. doi:
    10.1007/978-1-349-19161-1_14. ISBN 978-1-349-19161-1.
  • Yurdusev, A. (2003). International Relations and the Philosophy of History:
    A Civilizational Approach. Springer. doi:10.1057/9781403938404. ISBN 
    978-1-4039-3840-4.
  • Zaagsma, Gerben (2023). "Digital History and the Politics of Digitization".
    Digital Scholarship in the Humanities. 38 (2): 830–851. doi:10.1093/llc/
    fqac050.
  • Zajda, Joseph (2015). "Globalisation and the Politics of Education Reforms:
    History Education". Nation-Building and History Education in a Global
    Culture. Springer. pp. 1–14. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9729-0_1. ISBN 
    978-94-017-9729-0.
  • Zhao, Helen (2023). "Counterfactual History: Three Worries and Replies".
    Journal of the Philosophy of History. 17 (1): 9–30. doi:10.1163/
    18722636-12341487.

External links

  • Internet History Sourcebooks Project See also Internet History Sourcebooks
    Project (Collections of public domain and copy-permitted historical texts
    for educational use)

                           Links to related articles

                                       • v
                                       • t
                                       • e

                                Historiography
  • Historians
      □ list / by area of study
  • History

  • historians
  • historicity
  • history
  • theories of history

       Historical sources
          • Primary sources
 Types    • Secondary sources
          • Tertiary sources

          • Annals
          • Archives
          • Artifacts
          • Archaeological site
          • Chronicles
          • Codices
          • Deeds
          • Facsimiles
          • Features
Sources   • Hieroglyphs
          • Historical documents
          • Logbooks
          • Manuscripts
              □ Illuminated
          • Oral tradition
          • Papyri
          • Religious texts
          • Scrolls
          • War diaries
              □ Service records

                              Fields of study
            • Big History
            • World history
By scale        □ Human history
            • Local history
            • Microhistory

            • Archival science / Library and information science (template)
            • Books / Writing systems
            • Chorography
            • Chronology
                □ dating
            • Diplomatics
            • Encyclopaedistics
            • Epigraphy
            • Genealogy
            • Heraldry
By source   • Numismatics (Money)
            • Onomastics
            • Oral history
                □ preservation
            • Phaleristics
            • Philology
            • Postage stamps
            • Prosopography
            • Sigillography
            • Toponymy
            • Vexillology

            • Anthropology / Paleoanthropology
            • Cultural
            • Ecology / Environment / Geography
            • Economic
                □ Business
                □ Capitalism
                □ Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought
                □ Thought
            • Intellectual
                □ Geistesgeschichte
            • Linguistics
            • Maritime
            • Medieval churches
By topic    • Military
            • Political
                □ Constitutional
                □ Diplomatic
            • Social
                □ Feminism
                □ Gender
                □ Indigenous
                □ Labour
                □ LGBTQ
                □ Rural
                    ☆ Quantitative
                □ Urban
                □ Women

                  Methodology
  • Case study
  • Periodization
      □ Historical eras
      □ Tarikh
      □ Three-age system

              • Annales school
                  □ History of mentalities
                  □ Nouvelle histoire
              • Historiometry / Cliometrics
              • Comparative historical research
              • Critical
                  □ Decoloniality
              • Feminist
              • Historical anthropology
              • Historical determinism
              • Historism
              • Historical-critical method
              • Humanistic
Approaches,   • Indiscipline of history [pt]
  schools     • Leninist
              • Marxist
                  □ Historical materialism
              • Nationalist
                  □ Ancestral civilisation
                  □ Nationalization of history
              • People's history
                  □ Subaltern Studies
              • Pop history
              • Quantitative history
              • Revisionist
              • Transnational
              • Whig
                  □ Great Man theory

                                 Concepts
           • Change and continuity
           • Historic preservation
           • Historic recurrence
           • Historical significance
General    • Historicity
           • Historiology [es]
               □ Theory of history [de]
           • Philosophy

           • Black legend
           • Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge
           • Dark Ages
           • Historical negationism
           • Historian's fallacy / Presentism
           • Invented tradition
           • Modernisation theory
           • Narratives
           • Paradigm shift
           • Pax
Specific       □ list
           • Thirty-year rule
           • Transhistoricity
           • Translatio imperii / Translatio studii
           • Vaticinium ex eventu

                            • Age of Discovery
                            • Age of Enlightenment
         Periodization of   • European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War
          modern history    • Long 18th / 19th century
                            • Renaissance
                                □ Continuity thesis

                      By country or region
           • Egypt
               □ Pyramid construction techniques
               □ Black Egypt Thesis [es]
           • Ethiopia
 Africa    • Morocco
               □ Greater Morocco
           • Rwanda
               □ Double genocide theory
           • Maafa

           • Canada
               □ Metropolitan-hinterland thesis
               □ Residential schools
               □ Staples thesis
           • Indigenous population history

                         • Argentina
                             □ May Revolution / Causes
                             □ Revisionist [es]
         Latin America   • Peru
                             □ Iquicha Royalism
                         • Colonial Spanish America
Americas                     □ Casta

                         • African-American history
                             □ Nadir of American race relations
                             □ Neoabolitionism
                             □ Reconstruction era
         United States   • Consensus history
                         • Cyclical theory
                         • Frontier thesis
                         • Political history
                             □ Eras
                         • Progressive-era historians

           • Albania
               □ Dealbanisation
           • Austria
               □ Habsburg myth
           • Balhae
           • Belarus
               □ Litvinism
           • Bulgaria
           • Byzantine Empire [de]
               □ Early [ru]
           • Croatia
           • Europe
               □ Ancient [ru]
               □ Medieval [ru]
               □ New Age [ru]
           • Georgia
               □ Aryan Kartli
           • Greek
               □ Ages of Man
           • Iran
               □ 2,500-year celebration
           • Japan
           • Korea
               □ Nationalist
               □ Goguryeo controversies
           • North Macedonia
           • Philippines
               □ Early settlements
           • Portugal [pt]
               □ Lusotropicalism
           • Romania
               □ Great Union
           • Serbia
               □ Kosovo Myth
           • Sweden
               □ Götaland theory
           • Switzerland
           • Taiwan
           • Ukraine
               □ Executed Renaissance
           • Vietnam
               □ Nam tiến
               □ Trưng sisters

                        • Catilinarian conspiracy
                        • Christianization
                            □ Constantinian shift
                        • Expansion
                        • Fall of Western Rome
         Ancient Rome   • Prosopography
                        • Succession
                            □ Byzantine succession
                            □ Moscow, third Rome
                            □ Ottoman claim
                            □ Problem of two emperors

                        • 5000-year civilization assertion
                        • Archaeology
                        • Wunu School [zh]
                        • Century of humiliation
                        • Conquest dynasty
                            □ "Chineseness" debate
                        • New Qing History
            China       • Golden ages
                        • Hua–Yi distinction
                            □ Four Barbarians
                            □ Sinocentrism
                        • Self-Strengthening Movement
                        • Sprouts of capitalism
                        • Tibetan sovereignty debate

                        • Cordon sanitaire
                        • Frankish Interregnum [fr]
                        • Grand Siècle
            France      • Legendary Saracen [fr]
                        • Location of Alésia [fr]
Eurasia                 • Lyon [fr]

                        • Alltagsgeschichte
                        • Borussian myth
                        • Historikerstreit
           Germany      • Sonderweg
                        • Strukturgeschichte [de]
                        • Sybel-Ficker controversy
                        • Vergangenheitsbewältigung

                        • Greater Magadha
            India       • Indocentrism
                        • Indigenous Aryanism

                        • Great Famine
                        • "More Irish than the Irish themselves"
           Ireland      • Revisionism
                        • Revolutionary period

                        • Fascist Italy
                        • Fourth Italian War of Independence
                        • Historiae Patriae Monumenta
                        • Historical Series of the Bank of Italy
            Italy       • Italians, the good people
                        • Rerum italicarum scriptores
                        • Revisionism of Risorgimento
                        • Southern question
                            □ Neo-Bourbonism

                        • Golden Liberty
                        • Sarmatism
            Poland      • Deluge
                        • Partitions
                        • Polish People's Republic [pl]

                        • Anti-Normanism
                        • Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ru]
                            □ Skeptic School [ru]
                        • Soviet Union
            Russia          □ October Revolution
                        • Soviet famine of 1930–1933
                            □ Causes of the Holodomor
                            □ Holodomor genocide question
                            □ Holodomor in modern politics

                        • Black legend / White legend
                        • Hispanism
                        • Carlism in the Francoist era
                        • Convivencia
                        • Inquisition
                        • Limpieza de sangre controversy [es]
            Spain       • Reconquista
                            □ Islamic revolution of Spain [es]
                        • Revisionist
                        • Colonies or Provinces
                        • Spanish decline [es]
                        • Ser de España [es]

                        • Kemalist
                        • Ottoman Empire
            Turkey          □ Ghaza thesis
                            □ Decline thesis

                        • Poor Laws
                        • Scotland
                            □ Kingdom of Alba
                            □ Westminster Stone
                        • Storm over the gentry
            United      • Suffragette Campaign
           Kingdom      • Tudor myth
                            □ Ricardians
                        • Winter of Discontent

                      British   • Cambridge School
                      Empire    • Porter–MacKenzie debate
                                • Second colonial occupation

Oceania    • Colonial Australia

                               By war, conflict
                                       • v
                                       • t
                                       • e

                            Military historiography
  • Military history
  • List of military museums

                  • Albigensian Crusade
                      □ Catharism debate
                  • Crusades
                      □ Islamic views
                  • Eighty Years' War
   Pre-18th           □ Origins
    century       • Fall of Babylon
   conflicts      • Gallic Wars
                  • Late Bronze Age collapse
                      □ Dorian invasion
                      □ Sea Peoples
                  • Peloponnesian War

                                 • French Revolution
                                     □ Pre-revolution [fr]
                                     □ Causes
                Coalition Wars       □ New Russian School [ru]
                 (1792–1815)     • War in the Vendée
                                 • Napoleonic era
                                     □ Invasion of Russia
                                     □ Waterloo

                  • American Civil War
                      □ Origins
 18th and 19th        □ Turning point
    century       • Franco-Prussian War
   conflicts          □ Causes
                      □ Paris Commune
                  • Great Game
                  • Indian Rebellion of 1857
                      □ Causes
                  • Paraguayan War
                  • War of 1812
                      □ Origins
                  • War of the Pacific
                      □ Causes
                      □ Myth of English aid [es]

                  • Causes (Color books / Fischer thesis)
                  • Late Ottoman genocides (Causes of the Armenian genocide)
                  • Patriotic consent [fr]
                  • Persian famine of 1917–1919
                  • Powder keg of Europe
                  • Schlieffen Plan
  World War I     • Spirit of 1914 / 1917
                  • Treaty of Brest-Litovsk [ru]

                             • Reparations
                Treaty of    • War guilt question
                Versailles       □ Article 231
                                 □ Reichstag inquiry

                  • Burning of Smyrna
                  • Polish–Soviet War
Interwar period       □ Causes
                  • Spanish Civil War
                      □ Background

                  • Causes
                  • "Blitzkrieg" concept
                  • Broad vs. narrow front
                  • German resistance to Nazism
                  • Nazi foreign policy debate

                               • Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact
                               • Soviet offensive plans
                               • Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising
                  Eastern      • Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern
                   Front         Galicia
                               • Winter War
                                   □ Background
                                   □ Spirit

                               • Auschwitz bombing debate
                               • Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied
                                 Europe
 World War II                  • Functionalism–intentionalism debate
                               • In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba
                    The        • Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust
                 Holocaust         □ Pius Wars
                               • "Polish death camp"
                               • Responsibility
                               • Slovakia
                               • Uniqueness

                               • Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
                               • "Battle for Australia"
                Pacific War    • Bengal famine
                               • Second Sino-Japanese War
                                   □ Nanjing Massacre

                               • Battle of France
                  Western      • Guilty Men
                   Front       • Résistancialisme
                               • Vichy France [fr]

                  • Origins
                  • 1948 Palestine war
                      □ Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba
                      □ Zionism as settler colonialism
                      □ New Historians
                  • Malayan Emergency
                      □ Causes
                  • Algerian War
   Cold War       • Six-Day War
                      □ Origins
                  • Iranian revolution
                      □ Causes
                  • Iran–Iraq War
                  • Falklands War
                      □ Sovereignty dispute
                  • Sri Lankan civil war
                      □ Origins

                  • Russo-Georgian War
                      □ Background
 Post-Cold War        □ Responsibility
                  • Syrian revolution
                      □ Causes

                  • Conflict thesis
                  • Gunpowder and gun transmission
    Related       • Torsion mangonel myth
                  • War and genocide

  • ● Category

                 By person
            • Adolf Hitler
            • Alexander the Great
            • Amin al-Husseini
            • Aurangzeb
            • Cato the Younger
            • Che Guevara
            • Chiang Ching-kuo [zh]
            • Chiang Kai Shek [zh]
            • Constantine the Great
            • Gregory Palamas
            • Horatio Nelson
            • Hypatia
            • Jiang Zemin [zh]
            • Joseph Stalin [ru]
            • José de San Martín
            • Juan Manuel de Rosas
            • Klemens von Metternich
            • Leonid Brezhnev
            • Louis Riel
            • Mao Zedong [zh]
            • Muammar Gaddafi
Political   • Napoleon
 leaders    • Neville Chamberlain
            • Pedro II of Brazil
            • Simon Bolivar
                □ Cult of personality [es]
                □ Bolivarianism
            • Saladin
            • Sun Yat-sen [zh]
            • Thomas Aquinas
            • Thomas Jefferson
            • Ulysses S. Grant
            • Warren G. Harding
            • Yuan Shikai [zh]
            • Zhou Enlai [zh]
            • Zhuge Liang [zh]

                       • Australia
                       • Canada
          Historical   • Modern Germany
           rankings    • Netherlands
                       • United Kingdom
                       • United States

            • The Beatles
            • Charles Darwin
            • Friedrich Nietzsche
            • H. P. Lovecraft
            • Jane Austen
            • Muhammed
                □ Historicity
                □ Judaism
                □ Medieval Christian
            • Jesus
                □ Historicity
 Others         □ Resurrection
                □ Religious perspectives
                    ☆ Christianity
                    ☆ Judaism
                    ☆ Islam
            • J. R. R. Tolkien
                □ The Lord of the Rings
            • Madonna
            • Robert Falcon Scott
            • Socrates
            • Søren Kierkegaard
            • William Shakespeare

                            Other topics
  • Bears in antiquity
  • Crisis of historiography [pt]
  • Feudalism
  • Library of Alexandria
  • Nationalism in the Middle Ages
  • Professionalization and institutionalization of history
  • Salons
  • Western European colonialism and colonization
  • Desacralization of knowledge

             • Industrial Revolution
             • Great Recession
             • Great Depression
Economics    • School of Thoughts
                 □ Historical school of economics
                 □ English historical school of economics

             • Avestan geography
             • Early Christianity
                 □ Background
                 □ Historical reliability of the Gospels
                 □ Primacy of Peter
                     ☆ Opposition to Papal supremacy
                 □ Proto-orthodox Christianity
             • Early Islam
                 □ Criticism of the Quran
                 □ Succession to Muhammad
                 □ Islamic golden age
                 □ Kharijites
             • Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church
                 □ Second Vatican Council
                     ☆ Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [it]
             • Hesychast controversy
 Religion    • Protestant Reformation
                 □ Proto-Protestantism
                 □ Criticism of Protestantism
                 □ Protestant work ethic
             • Jesuit historiography
             • Modern Jewish history
                 □ Wissenschaft des Judentums
             • Schools of thought
                 □ Biblical criticism
                 □ Catholic theology
                 □ Panbabylonism
                 □ Urreligion
                 □ Perennial
                 □ Religionsgeschichtliche Schule
                 □ Roman
                 □ Revisionist school of Islamic studies

             • Merton thesis
Science /    • Protestant Ethic and Capitalism
Technology   • Heroic theory of invention and scientific development
             • Gunpowder and gun transmission
             • Torsion mangonel myth

 Organizations, publications
  • Heritage registers
  • Historical society (list)
  • History institutes
  • History journals
      □ template

                   Related
  • Commemorative plaque
  • Documentary film
  • Hagiography
  • Historical fiction
      □ Historical realism
      □ Historiographic metafiction
  • Historical geographic information system

  • ● Category
  • ● Multimedia

                               • v
                               • t
                               • e

                             Time
                     • Past
                     • Present
   Key concepts      • Future
                     • Eternity

                                 • UTC
                                 • UT
                   Chronometry   • TAI
                                 • Unit of time
                                 • Orders of magnitude (time)

                                 • Italian six-hour clock
                                 • Thai six-hour clock
                                 • 12-hour clock
                                 • 24-hour clock
                                 • Relative hour
                                 • Daylight saving time
                                 • Chinese
                   Measurement   • Decimal
                     systems     • Hexadecimal
                                 • Hindu
                                 • Metric
                                 • Roman
                                 • Sidereal
                                 • Solar
                                 • Time zone

                                 • Main types
                                     □ Solar
                                     □ Lunar
                                     □ Lunisolar
   Measurement                   • Gregorian
  and standards                  • Julian
                    Calendars    • Hebrew
                                 • Islamic
                                 • Solar Hijri
                                 • Chinese
                                 • Hindu Panchang
                                 • Maya
                                 • List

                                 • Main types
                                     □ astronomical
                                         ☆ astrarium
                                     □ atomic
                                         ☆ quantum
                                     □ hourglass
                                     □ marine
                                     □ sundial
                     Clocks          □ watch
                                         ☆ mechanical
                                         ☆ stopwatch
                                     □ water-based
                                 • Cuckoo clock
                                 • Digital clock
                                 • Grandfather clock
                                 • History
                                     □ Timeline

                     • Astronomical chronology
                     • Big History
    • Chronology     • Calendar era
     • History       • Deep time
                     • Periodization
                     • Regnal year
                     • Timeline

                     • A series and B series
                     • B-theory of time
                     • Chronocentrism
                     • Duration
                     • Endurantism
                     • Eternal return
Philosophy of time   • Eternalism
                     • Event
                     • Perdurantism
                     • Presentism
                     • Temporal finitism
                     • Temporal parts
                     • The Unreality of Time

                     • Ages of Man
                     • Destiny
                     • Immortality
     • Religion      • Dreamtime
    • Mythology      • Kāla
                     • Time and fate deities
                         □ Father Time
                     • Wheel of time
                         □ Kalachakra

                     • Chronemics
                     • Generation time
                     • Mental chronometry
                     • Music
 Human experience        □ tempo
 and use of time         □ time signature
                     • Rosy retrospection
                     • Tense–aspect–mood
                     • Time management
                     • Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow

                                  • Geological time
                                      □ age
                                      □ chron
                                      □ eon
                     Geology          □ epoch
                                      □ era
                                      □ period
                                  • Geochronology
                                  • Geological history of Earth

                                  • Absolute space and time
                                  • Arrow of time
                                  • Chronon
                                  • Coordinate time
 Time in science                  • Instant
                     Physics      • Proper time
                                  • Spacetime
                                  • Theory of relativity
                                  • Time domain
                                  • Time translation symmetry
                                  • Time reversal symmetry

                                  • Chronological dating
                                  • Chronobiology
                   Other fields       □ Circadian rhythms
                                  • Clock reaction
                                  • Glottochronology
                                  • Time geography

                     • Leap year
                     • Memory
                     • Moment
                     • Space
     Related         • System time
                     • Tempus fugit
                     • Time capsule
                     • Time immemorial
                     • Time travel

  • ● Category
  • ● Commons

                                    • v
                                    • t
                                    • e

                               Humanities
              • Anthropology
              • Archaeology
              • Classical studies
              • History
              • Language arts
                  □ Literature
                  □ Poetry
                  □ Rhetoric
              • Law
              • Performing arts
                  □ Dance
                  □ Music
Disciplines       □ Theatre
              • Philosophy
              • Religious studies
              • Visual arts
                  □ Filmmaking
                  □ Painting
                  □ Sculpture

                                       • Digital
                                       • Environmental
            Interdisciplinary fields   • Health
                                       • Medical
                                       • Public

              • Abductive reasoning
              • Aesthetics
              • Antipositivism
              • The arts
              • Beauty
              • Belles-lettres
              • Bildung
              • Creativity
              • Critical theory
              • Criticism
              • Cultural literacy
              • Culture
                  □ High
                  □ Pop
              • General knowledge
  Themes      • Hermeneutics
              •  Historicism
              • Historism
              • Human condition
              • Humanitas
              • Liberal arts education
                  □ Trivium
                  □ Quadrivium
              • Metaphysics
                  □ Ontology
              • Moral character
              • Self-realization
              • Self-reflection
              • Wisdom
              • Work of art

              • American Journal of Archaeology
              • Daedalus
              • History of Humanities
              • Humanitas
              • Humanities and Social Sciences Communications
              • Journal of Controversial Ideas
 Journals     • Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
              • Leonardo
              • Nova Religio
              • Revue des Études Arméniennes
              • Teaching Philosophy
              • more...

              • Arts and Humanities Research Council
              • Human science
                  □ Geisteswissenschaft
              • Humanities, arts, and social sciences
 Academia     • Master of Humanities
              • Moscow University for the Humanities
              • National Endowment for the Humanities
              • National Humanities Medal

              • Antihumanism
                  □ Philistinism
              • Criticism of mass culture
              • Educational essentialism
  Related     • Humanities in the United States
              • List of people considered a founder in a humanities field
              • Outline of the humanities
              • Renaissance humanism
              • Studia Humanitatis

                            • v
                            • t
                            • e

                     Social sciences
  • Outline
  • History
  • Index

                        • Anthropology
                            □ archaeology
                            □ cultural
                            □ social
                            □ physical
                        • Economics
                            □ microeconomics
                            □ macroeconomics
                            □ econometrics
                            □ mathematical
                        • Geography
                            □ physical
                            □ human
                            □ technical
                            □ integrated
                        • History
                            □ cultural
                            □ auxiliary sciences
                            □ economic
                            □ human
                            □ military
                            □ political
                            □ social
                        • Law
       Primary              □ jurisprudence
                            □ legal history
                            □ legal systems
                            □ public law
                            □ private law
                        • Linguistics
                            □ semiotics
                        • Political science
                            □ international relations
                            □ comparative
                            □ philosophy
                            □ public policy
                            □ public administration
                        • Psychology
                            □ abnormal
                            □ cognitive
                            □ developmental
                            □ personality
                            □ social
                        • Sociology
                            □ criminology
                            □ demography
                            □ internet
                            □ rural
                            □ urban

                        • Administration
                            □ business
                            □ public
                        • Anthrozoology
                        • Area studies
                        • Business studies
                        • Cognitive science
                        • Communication studies
                        • Community studies
                        • Criminology
                        • Cultural studies
                        • Development studies
                        • Education
                        • Environmental
                            □ social science
                            □ studies
                        • Food studies
                        • Gender studies
                        • Global studies
                        • Historical sociology
                        • History of technology
                        • Human ecology
                        • Information science
                        • International studies
  Interdisciplinary     • Linguistics
                        • Management
                        • Media studies
                        • Philosophies
                            □ science
                            □ economics
                            □ history
                            □ psychology
                            □ social science
                        • Planning
                            □ land use
                            □ regional
                            □ urban
                        • Political ecology
                        • Political economy
                        • Political sociology
                        • Public health
                        • Regional science
                        • Science and technology studies
                        • Science studies
                            □ historical
                            □ Quantum social science
                        • Social work
                        • Vegan studies

        List            • List of social science journals

                        • Behavioral sciences
                        • Geisteswissenschaft
Other categorizations   • Human science
                        • Humanities

  • ● Category
  • ● Commons
  • icon Society portal
  • ● Wikiversity

                                      • v
                                      • t
                                      • e

                              Social philosophy
               • Agency
               • Anomie
               • Convention
               • Cosmopolitanism
               • Customs
               • Cultural heritage
               • Culturalism
                   □ Inter
                   □ Mono
                   □ Multi
               • Culture
                   □ Counter
               • Familialism
               • History
               • Honour
               • Human nature
               • Identity
                   □ Formation
               • Ideology
               • Institutions
               • Invisible hand
  Concepts     • Loyalty
               • Modernity
               • Morality
                   □ Public
               • Mores
               • National character
               • Natural law
               • Personhood
               • Reification
               • Ressentiment
               • Rights
               • Sittlichkeit
               • Social alienation
               • Social norms
               • Spontaneous order
               • Stewardship
               • Traditions
               • Values
                   □ Family
               • Volksgeist
               • Worldview

               • Budapest School
               • Catholic social teaching
                   □ Distributism
               • Communitarianism
  Schools      • Confucianism
               • Conservatism
                   □ Social
               • Frankfurt School
               • Personalism

                             • Augustine
                             • Cicero
                             • Confucius
                             • Lactantius
                             • Laozi
                             • Mencius
                             • Mozi
                Ancient      • Origen
                             • Philo
                             • Plato
                             • Polybius
                             • Tertullian
                             • Thucydides
                             • Xunzi

                             • Alpharabius
                             • Aquinas
                             • Avempace
                             • Bruni
                             • Dante
                             • Gelasius
               Medieval      • Ibn Khaldun
                             • Maimonides
                             • Muhammad
                             • Photios
                             • Plethon
                             • Ibn Tufayl

                             • Calvin
                             • Erasmus
                             • Guicciardini
                             • Locke
             Early modern    • Luther
                             • Milton
                             • Montaigne
                             • Müntzer

                             • Arnold
                             • Bentham
                             • Bonald
                             • Burke
                             • Carlyle
                             • Comte
                             • Condorcet
                             • Emerson
                             • Engels
                             • Fichte
                             • Fourier
                             • Franklin
                             • Hegel
                             • Helvétius
                             • Herder
                             • Hume
                             • Jefferson
                             • Kant
                             • Kierkegaard
             18th and 19th   • Le Bon
               centuries     • Le Play
                             • Marx
                             • Mill
                             • Nietzsche
                             • Owen
                             • Renan
                             • Rousseau
                             • Royce
                             • Ruskin
                             • Smith
                             • Spencer
                             • de Staël
                             • Stirner
Philosophers                 • Taine
                             • Thoreau
                             • Tocqueville
                             • Vico
                             • Vivekananda
                             • Voltaire

                             • Adorno
                             • Agamben
                             • Arendt
                             • Aron
                             • Badiou
                             • Baudrillard
                             • Bauman
                             • Benoist
                             • Berlin
                             • Butler
                             • Camus
                             • de Beauvoir
                             • Debord
                             • Deleuze
                             • Dewey
                             • Du Bois
                             • Durkheim
                             • Eco
                             • Evola
                             • Foucault
                             • Fromm
                             • Gandhi
                             • Gehlen
                             • Gentile
                             • Gramsci
                             • Guénon
                             • Habermas
                             • Han
                             • Heidegger
                             • Hoppe
             20th and 21st   • Irigaray
               centuries     • Kirk
                             • Kołakowski
                             • Kropotkin
                             • Land
                             • Lasch
                             • MacIntyre
                             • Marcuse
                             • Maritain
                             • Negri
                             • Niebuhr
                             • Nussbaum
                             • Oakeshott
                             • Ortega
                             • Pareto
                             • Polanyi
                             • Radhakrishnan
                             • Röpke
                             • Santayana
                             • Scruton
                             • Shariati
                             • Simmel
                             • Skinner
                             • Sombart
                             • Sowell
                             • Spengler
                             • Taylor
                             • Voegelin
                             • Walzer
                             • Weber
                             • Weil
                             • Zinn
                             • Žižek

               • De Officiis (44 BC)
               • Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486)
               • A Vindication of Natural Society (1756)
               • Democracy in America (1835–1840)
               • Civilization and Its Discontents (1930)
               • The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935)
               • The Second Sex (1949)
               • One-Dimensional Man (1964)
   Works       • The Society of the Spectacle (1967)
               • The History of Sexuality (1976)
               • The Culture of Narcissism (1979)
               • A Conflict of Visions (1987)
               • The Closing of the American Mind (1987)
               • Gender Trouble (1990)
               • The Malaise of Modernity (1991)
               • Intellectuals and Society (2010)

               • Agnotology
               • Axiology
               • Critical theory
               • Cultural criticism
               • Cultural pessimism
               • Ethics
               • Historism
               • Historicism
  See also     • Humanities
               • Philosophy of culture
               • Philosophy of education
               • Philosophy of history
               • Political philosophy
               • Social criticism
               • Social science
               • Social theory
               • Sociology

  • Category

                                       • v
                                       • t
                                       • e

                                  Chronology
                    • Archaeology
                    • Astronomy
                    • Geology
   Key topics       • History
                        □ Big History
                    • Paleontology
                    • Time

                                  • Human Era
                                  • Ab urbe condita
                                  • Anno Domini / Common Era
                                  • Anno Mundi
                                  • Bosporan era
                                  • Bostran era
                                  • Byzantine era
                                  • Seleucid era
                                  • Era of Caesar (Iberia)
                  Calendar eras   • Before present
                                  • Hijri
                                  • Egyptian
                                  • Sothic cycle
     • Periods                    • Hindu units of time (Yuga)
      • Eras                      • Mesoamerican
     • Epochs                         □ Long Count
                                      □ Short Count
                                      □ Tzolk'in
                                      □ Haab'

                                  • Anka year
                                  • Canon of Kings
                   Regnal year    • English and British regnal year
                                  • Lists of kings
                                  • Limmu

                                  • Chinese
                    Era names     • Japanese
                                  • Korean
                                  • Vietnamese

                                        • Pre-Julian Roman
                                        • Original Julian
                  Pre-Julian / Julian   • Proleptic Julian
                                        • Revised Julian

                                        • Gregorian
                                        • Proleptic Gregorian
                       Gregorian        • Old Style and New Style dates
                                        • Adoption of the Gregorian calendar
                                        • Dual dating

                                        • Lunisolar (Hebrew, Hindu)
    Calendars                           • Solar
                     Astronomical       • Lunar (Islamic)
                                        • Astronomical year numbering

                                        • Chinese sexagenary cycle
                                        • Geologic Calendar
                                        • Iranian
                                        • ISO week date
                        Others          • Mesoamerican
                                            □ Maya
                                            □ Aztec
                                        • Winter count
                                        • New Earth Time

                    • Cosmic Calendar
                    • Ephemeris
 Astronomic time    • Galactic year
                    • Metonic cycle
                    • Milankovitch cycles

                              • Deep time
                  Concepts    • Geological history of Earth
                              • Geological time units

                              • Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA)
                  Standards   • Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point
                                (GSSP)
  Geologic time
                              • Chronostratigraphy
                              • Geochronology
                   Methods    • Isotope geochemistry
                              • Law of superposition
                              • Luminescence dating
                              • Samarium–neodymium dating

                                    • Amino acid racemisation
                                    • Archaeomagnetic dating
                                    • Dendrochronology
                                    • Ice core
                                    • Incremental dating
                                    • Lichenometry
                                    • Paleomagnetism
                  Absolute dating   • Radiometric dating
                                        □ Lead–lead
                                        □ Potassium–argon
  Chronological                         □ Radiocarbon
     dating                             □ Uranium–lead
                                    • Tephrochronology
                                    • Luminescence dating
                                    • Thermoluminescence dating

                                    • Fluorine absorption
                                    • Nitrogen dating
                  Relative dating   • Obsidian hydration
                                    • Seriation
                                    • Stratigraphy

 Genetic methods    • Molecular clock

   Linguistic       • Glottochronology
     methods
                    • Chronicle
                    • New Chronology
                    • Synchronoptic view
 Related topics     • Timeline
                    • Year zero
                    • Floruit
                    • Terminus post quem
                    • ASPRO chronology

                                       • v
                                       • t
                                       • e

                              Theories of history
  • Annales
  • Conceptual
  • Cultural
  • Economic
  • Environmental
  • Gender
  • Historicism

  • Marxist
  • Macrohistory
  • Microhistory
  • Postcolonial
  • Politics
  • Postmodern
  • Psychohistory
  • Social

  • List of historians
  • History
  • Big History

                                       • v
                                       • t
                                       • e

                                Historiography
  • Historians
      □ list / by area of study
  • History

  • historians
  • historicity
  • history
  • theories of history

       Historical sources
          • Primary sources
 Types    • Secondary sources
          • Tertiary sources

          • Annals
          • Archives
          • Artifacts
          • Archaeological site
          • Chronicles
          • Codices
          • Deeds
          • Facsimiles
          • Features
Sources   • Hieroglyphs
          • Historical documents
          • Logbooks
          • Manuscripts
              □ Illuminated
          • Oral tradition
          • Papyri
          • Religious texts
          • Scrolls
          • War diaries
              □ Service records

                              Fields of study
            • Big History
            • World history
By scale        □ Human history
            • Local history
            • Microhistory

            • Archival science / Library and information science (template)
            • Books / Writing systems
            • Chorography
            • Chronology
                □ dating
            • Diplomatics
            • Encyclopaedistics
            • Epigraphy
            • Genealogy
            • Heraldry
By source   • Numismatics (Money)
            • Onomastics
            • Oral history
                □ preservation
            • Phaleristics
            • Philology
            • Postage stamps
            • Prosopography
            • Sigillography
            • Toponymy
            • Vexillology

            • Anthropology / Paleoanthropology
            • Cultural
            • Ecology / Environment / Geography
            • Economic
                □ Business
                □ Capitalism
                □ Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought
                □ Thought
            • Intellectual
                □ Geistesgeschichte
            • Linguistics
            • Maritime
            • Medieval churches
By topic    • Military
            • Political
                □ Constitutional
                □ Diplomatic
            • Social
                □ Feminism
                □ Gender
                □ Indigenous
                □ Labour
                □ LGBTQ
                □ Rural
                    ☆ Quantitative
                □ Urban
                □ Women

                  Methodology
  • Case study
  • Periodization
      □ Historical eras
      □ Tarikh
      □ Three-age system

              • Annales school
                  □ History of mentalities
                  □ Nouvelle histoire
              • Historiometry / Cliometrics
              • Comparative historical research
              • Critical
                  □ Decoloniality
              • Feminist
              • Historical anthropology
              • Historical determinism
              • Historism
              • Historical-critical method
              • Humanistic
Approaches,   • Indiscipline of history [pt]
  schools     • Leninist
              • Marxist
                  □ Historical materialism
              • Nationalist
                  □ Ancestral civilisation
                  □ Nationalization of history
              • People's history
                  □ Subaltern Studies
              • Pop history
              • Quantitative history
              • Revisionist
              • Transnational
              • Whig
                  □ Great Man theory

                                 Concepts
           • Change and continuity
           • Historic preservation
           • Historic recurrence
           • Historical significance
General    • Historicity
           • Historiology [es]
               □ Theory of history [de]
           • Philosophy

           • Black legend
           • Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge
           • Dark Ages
           • Historical negationism
           • Historian's fallacy / Presentism
           • Invented tradition
           • Modernisation theory
           • Narratives
           • Paradigm shift
           • Pax
Specific       □ list
           • Thirty-year rule
           • Transhistoricity
           • Translatio imperii / Translatio studii
           • Vaticinium ex eventu

                            • Age of Discovery
                            • Age of Enlightenment
         Periodization of   • European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War
          modern history    • Long 18th / 19th century
                            • Renaissance
                                □ Continuity thesis

                      By country or region
           • Egypt
               □ Pyramid construction techniques
               □ Black Egypt Thesis [es]
           • Ethiopia
 Africa    • Morocco
               □ Greater Morocco
           • Rwanda
               □ Double genocide theory
           • Maafa

           • Canada
               □ Metropolitan-hinterland thesis
               □ Residential schools
               □ Staples thesis
           • Indigenous population history

                         • Argentina
                             □ May Revolution / Causes
                             □ Revisionist [es]
         Latin America   • Peru
                             □ Iquicha Royalism
                         • Colonial Spanish America
Americas                     □ Casta

                         • African-American history
                             □ Nadir of American race relations
                             □ Neoabolitionism
                             □ Reconstruction era
         United States   • Consensus history
                         • Cyclical theory
                         • Frontier thesis
                         • Political history
                             □ Eras
                         • Progressive-era historians

           • Albania
               □ Dealbanisation
           • Austria
               □ Habsburg myth
           • Balhae
           • Belarus
               □ Litvinism
           • Bulgaria
           • Byzantine Empire [de]
               □ Early [ru]
           • Croatia
           • Europe
               □ Ancient [ru]
               □ Medieval [ru]
               □ New Age [ru]
           • Georgia
               □ Aryan Kartli
           • Greek
               □ Ages of Man
           • Iran
               □ 2,500-year celebration
           • Japan
           • Korea
               □ Nationalist
               □ Goguryeo controversies
           • North Macedonia
           • Philippines
               □ Early settlements
           • Portugal [pt]
               □ Lusotropicalism
           • Romania
               □ Great Union
           • Serbia
               □ Kosovo Myth
           • Sweden
               □ Götaland theory
           • Switzerland
           • Taiwan
           • Ukraine
               □ Executed Renaissance
           • Vietnam
               □ Nam tiến
               □ Trưng sisters

                        • Catilinarian conspiracy
                        • Christianization
                            □ Constantinian shift
                        • Expansion
                        • Fall of Western Rome
         Ancient Rome   • Prosopography
                        • Succession
                            □ Byzantine succession
                            □ Moscow, third Rome
                            □ Ottoman claim
                            □ Problem of two emperors

                        • 5000-year civilization assertion
                        • Archaeology
                        • Wunu School [zh]
                        • Century of humiliation
                        • Conquest dynasty
                            □ "Chineseness" debate
                        • New Qing History
            China       • Golden ages
                        • Hua–Yi distinction
                            □ Four Barbarians
                            □ Sinocentrism
                        • Self-Strengthening Movement
                        • Sprouts of capitalism
                        • Tibetan sovereignty debate

                        • Cordon sanitaire
                        • Frankish Interregnum [fr]
                        • Grand Siècle
            France      • Legendary Saracen [fr]
                        • Location of Alésia [fr]
Eurasia                 • Lyon [fr]

                        • Alltagsgeschichte
                        • Borussian myth
                        • Historikerstreit
           Germany      • Sonderweg
                        • Strukturgeschichte [de]
                        • Sybel-Ficker controversy
                        • Vergangenheitsbewältigung

                        • Greater Magadha
            India       • Indocentrism
                        • Indigenous Aryanism

                        • Great Famine
                        • "More Irish than the Irish themselves"
           Ireland      • Revisionism
                        • Revolutionary period

                        • Fascist Italy
                        • Fourth Italian War of Independence
                        • Historiae Patriae Monumenta
                        • Historical Series of the Bank of Italy
            Italy       • Italians, the good people
                        • Rerum italicarum scriptores
                        • Revisionism of Risorgimento
                        • Southern question
                            □ Neo-Bourbonism

                        • Golden Liberty
                        • Sarmatism
            Poland      • Deluge
                        • Partitions
                        • Polish People's Republic [pl]

                        • Anti-Normanism
                        • Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ru]
                            □ Skeptic School [ru]
                        • Soviet Union
            Russia          □ October Revolution
                        • Soviet famine of 1930–1933
                            □ Causes of the Holodomor
                            □ Holodomor genocide question
                            □ Holodomor in modern politics

                        • Black legend / White legend
                        • Hispanism
                        • Carlism in the Francoist era
                        • Convivencia
                        • Inquisition
                        • Limpieza de sangre controversy [es]
            Spain       • Reconquista
                            □ Islamic revolution of Spain [es]
                        • Revisionist
                        • Colonies or Provinces
                        • Spanish decline [es]
                        • Ser de España [es]

                        • Kemalist
                        • Ottoman Empire
            Turkey          □ Ghaza thesis
                            □ Decline thesis

                        • Poor Laws
                        • Scotland
                            □ Kingdom of Alba
                            □ Westminster Stone
                        • Storm over the gentry
            United      • Suffragette Campaign
           Kingdom      • Tudor myth
                            □ Ricardians
                        • Winter of Discontent

                      British   • Cambridge School
                      Empire    • Porter–MacKenzie debate
                                • Second colonial occupation

Oceania    • Colonial Australia

                               By war, conflict
                                       • v
                                       • t
                                       • e

                            Military historiography
  • Military history
  • List of military museums

                  • Albigensian Crusade
                      □ Catharism debate
                  • Crusades
                      □ Islamic views
                  • Eighty Years' War
   Pre-18th           □ Origins
    century       • Fall of Babylon
   conflicts      • Gallic Wars
                  • Late Bronze Age collapse
                      □ Dorian invasion
                      □ Sea Peoples
                  • Peloponnesian War

                                 • French Revolution
                                     □ Pre-revolution [fr]
                                     □ Causes
                Coalition Wars       □ New Russian School [ru]
                 (1792–1815)     • War in the Vendée
                                 • Napoleonic era
                                     □ Invasion of Russia
                                     □ Waterloo

                  • American Civil War
                      □ Origins
 18th and 19th        □ Turning point
    century       • Franco-Prussian War
   conflicts          □ Causes
                      □ Paris Commune
                  • Great Game
                  • Indian Rebellion of 1857
                      □ Causes
                  • Paraguayan War
                  • War of 1812
                      □ Origins
                  • War of the Pacific
                      □ Causes
                      □ Myth of English aid [es]

                  • Causes (Color books / Fischer thesis)
                  • Late Ottoman genocides (Causes of the Armenian genocide)
                  • Patriotic consent [fr]
                  • Persian famine of 1917–1919
                  • Powder keg of Europe
                  • Schlieffen Plan
  World War I     • Spirit of 1914 / 1917
                  • Treaty of Brest-Litovsk [ru]

                             • Reparations
                Treaty of    • War guilt question
                Versailles       □ Article 231
                                 □ Reichstag inquiry

                  • Burning of Smyrna
                  • Polish–Soviet War
Interwar period       □ Causes
                  • Spanish Civil War
                      □ Background

                  • Causes
                  • "Blitzkrieg" concept
                  • Broad vs. narrow front
                  • German resistance to Nazism
                  • Nazi foreign policy debate

                               • Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact
                               • Soviet offensive plans
                               • Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising
                  Eastern      • Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern
                   Front         Galicia
                               • Winter War
                                   □ Background
                                   □ Spirit

                               • Auschwitz bombing debate
                               • Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied
                                 Europe
 World War II                  • Functionalism–intentionalism debate
                               • In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba
                    The        • Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust
                 Holocaust         □ Pius Wars
                               • "Polish death camp"
                               • Responsibility
                               • Slovakia
                               • Uniqueness

                               • Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
                               • "Battle for Australia"
                Pacific War    • Bengal famine
                               • Second Sino-Japanese War
                                   □ Nanjing Massacre

                               • Battle of France
                  Western      • Guilty Men
                   Front       • Résistancialisme
                               • Vichy France [fr]

                  • Origins
                  • 1948 Palestine war
                      □ Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba
                      □ Zionism as settler colonialism
                      □ New Historians
                  • Malayan Emergency
                      □ Causes
                  • Algerian War
   Cold War       • Six-Day War
                      □ Origins
                  • Iranian revolution
                      □ Causes
                  • Iran–Iraq War
                  • Falklands War
                      □ Sovereignty dispute
                  • Sri Lankan civil war
                      □ Origins

                  • Russo-Georgian War
                      □ Background
 Post-Cold War        □ Responsibility
                  • Syrian revolution
                      □ Causes

                  • Conflict thesis
                  • Gunpowder and gun transmission
    Related       • Torsion mangonel myth
                  • War and genocide

  • ● Category

                 By person
            • Adolf Hitler
            • Alexander the Great
            • Amin al-Husseini
            • Aurangzeb
            • Cato the Younger
            • Che Guevara
            • Chiang Ching-kuo [zh]
            • Chiang Kai Shek [zh]
            • Constantine the Great
            • Gregory Palamas
            • Horatio Nelson
            • Hypatia
            • Jiang Zemin [zh]
            • Joseph Stalin [ru]
            • José de San Martín
            • Juan Manuel de Rosas
            • Klemens von Metternich
            • Leonid Brezhnev
            • Louis Riel
            • Mao Zedong [zh]
            • Muammar Gaddafi
Political   • Napoleon
 leaders    • Neville Chamberlain
            • Pedro II of Brazil
            • Simon Bolivar
                □ Cult of personality [es]
                □ Bolivarianism
            • Saladin
            • Sun Yat-sen [zh]
            • Thomas Aquinas
            • Thomas Jefferson
            • Ulysses S. Grant
            • Warren G. Harding
            • Yuan Shikai [zh]
            • Zhou Enlai [zh]
            • Zhuge Liang [zh]

                       • Australia
                       • Canada
          Historical   • Modern Germany
           rankings    • Netherlands
                       • United Kingdom
                       • United States

            • The Beatles
            • Charles Darwin
            • Friedrich Nietzsche
            • H. P. Lovecraft
            • Jane Austen
            • Muhammed
                □ Historicity
                □ Judaism
                □ Medieval Christian
            • Jesus
                □ Historicity
 Others         □ Resurrection
                □ Religious perspectives
                    ☆ Christianity
                    ☆ Judaism
                    ☆ Islam
            • J. R. R. Tolkien
                □ The Lord of the Rings
            • Madonna
            • Robert Falcon Scott
            • Socrates
            • Søren Kierkegaard
            • William Shakespeare

                            Other topics
  • Bears in antiquity
  • Crisis of historiography [pt]
  • Feudalism
  • Library of Alexandria
  • Nationalism in the Middle Ages
  • Professionalization and institutionalization of history
  • Salons
  • Western European colonialism and colonization
  • Desacralization of knowledge

             • Industrial Revolution
             • Great Recession
             • Great Depression
Economics    • School of Thoughts
                 □ Historical school of economics
                 □ English historical school of economics

             • Avestan geography
             • Early Christianity
                 □ Background
                 □ Historical reliability of the Gospels
                 □ Primacy of Peter
                     ☆ Opposition to Papal supremacy
                 □ Proto-orthodox Christianity
             • Early Islam
                 □ Criticism of the Quran
                 □ Succession to Muhammad
                 □ Islamic golden age
                 □ Kharijites
             • Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church
                 □ Second Vatican Council
                     ☆ Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [it]
             • Hesychast controversy
 Religion    • Protestant Reformation
                 □ Proto-Protestantism
                 □ Criticism of Protestantism
                 □ Protestant work ethic
             • Jesuit historiography
             • Modern Jewish history
                 □ Wissenschaft des Judentums
             • Schools of thought
                 □ Biblical criticism
                 □ Catholic theology
                 □ Panbabylonism
                 □ Urreligion
                 □ Perennial
                 □ Religionsgeschichtliche Schule
                 □ Roman
                 □ Revisionist school of Islamic studies

             • Merton thesis
Science /    • Protestant Ethic and Capitalism
Technology   • Heroic theory of invention and scientific development
             • Gunpowder and gun transmission
             • Torsion mangonel myth

 Organizations, publications
  • Heritage registers
  • Historical society (list)
  • History institutes
  • History journals
      □ template

                   Related
  • Commemorative plaque
  • Documentary film
  • Hagiography
  • Historical fiction
      □ Historical realism
      □ Historiographic metafiction
  • Historical geographic information system

  • ● Category
  • ● Multimedia

History at Wikipedia's sister projects:

  • ●Definitions from Wiktionary
  • ●Media from Commons
  • ●News from Wikinews
  • ●Quotations from Wikiquote
  • ●Texts from Wikisource
  • ●Textbooks from Wikibooks
  • ●Resources from Wikiversity
  • ●Data from Wikidata

  Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
International   • FAST

                • Germany
                • United States
                • France
                • BnF data
                • Japan
                • Czech Republic
  National          □ 2
                • Spain
                    □ 2
                • Latvia
                • Greece
                • Israel

                • Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
    Other       • NARA
                • Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine
                • İslâm Ansiklopedisi
