       This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or
       argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings
[40px] or presents an original argument about a topic. Please help improve it
       by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (May 2020) (Learn how and when
       to remove this message)

A long line of female scholars and activists attained high position and great
renown both during the life-time of the Prophet (pbuh) and afterwards, when
Islamic civilisation was flourishing. For example, the Prophet (pbuh) assigned
women to important administrative posts. He appointed a woman named Samra’
binti Nuhaik al-Asadiyyah to the position of muhtasib (market inspector), in
which post she regulated commercial activity and guarded public interest. Not
only did she keep this position during the rule of the first two caliphs, but
Caliph ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab appointed another woman, al-Shifa´ (Layla) binti
‘Abdullah, to the same position. She became well known and highly respected in
the community for her knowledge, piety and morality^[1].Since the Islamic
Golden Age, Muslims, including women, have been actively participating in
various sciences.^[2]^[3] Despite being involved in politics throughout Islamic
history, women have experienced—and still continue to experience—gender-based
discrimination in many Muslim countries because of the belief that certain
discriminatory practices have a basis in Islam^[2] even though the Quran,
hadiths, and sunnah advocate for the equal rights of men and women to seek
knowledge.^[4]^[5]^[6]

Individuals

Rufayda al-Aslamiyyah

Main article: Rufaida Al-Aslamia

Also known as the first nurse in Islamic history, Rufayda al-Aslamiyyah led a
team of volunteer nurses in the battles of Badr, Uhud, Ditch, Khaybar, and
other conflicts to take care of the wounded and dying.^[7] She further played a
role in the development of the first mobile medical units to satisfy the
requirements of the community for medical care.^[7] Through assisting her
father, Saad Al-Aslamy, Rufayda learnt most of her knowledge. She became a
healer after devoting her time to nursing and taking care of the ill. She used
to practice her skills in her tent during the battles. Muhammad used to demand
that all casualties be sent to her tent as she had high expertise in the field.
^[3]

The Aga Khan University named the College of Nursing and Midwifery after her in
honour of her service. The Rufaida Al Aslamiya Award is given annually by the
University of Bahrain to exceptional nurses.^[7]

Al-Shifa bint Abdullah

Main article: Al-Shifa' bint Abdullah

Al-Shifa bint Abdulla worked in public administration and trained in medicine.^
[3] She was the first Muslim woman to teach traditional medical practices.^[7]
Although her name was Laila, she was given the name Al-Shifa (Arabic for "the
healing") because of her profession as a nurse.^[3] Her method to treat
patients was to use a preventative treatment against ant bites. Her method
received approval from Muhammad, and she was requested to train other women.^[3
]

[220px-AnoushehAnsari]
Anousheh Ansari

Anousheh Ansari

Main article: Anousheh Ansari

On September 18, 2006, Anousheh Ansari became the first female private space
explorer at 40 years of age.^[8] She was launched off from Kazakhstan in a
Russian Soyuz spacecraft^[9] She migrated from Iran to America when she was
about 17, in 1984.^[10] In 1993, her husband Hamid Ansari and brother-in-law
Amir Ansari worked together and funded a company called Telecom Technologies
Inc.^[11] Ansari received her bachelor's degree in computer and electronic
engineering from George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia. Soon after, she
completed her masters' degree in Washington, D.C., at George Washington
University.^[10] Anousheh spoke several different languages, such as Persian,
French, English, and Russian - which she learned for her spaceflight.^[9]

[220px-Hayat_Sindi_-_PopTech_20]
Hayat Sindi

Hayat Al Sindi

Main article: Hayat Sindi

Hayat Al Sindi is a medical scientist in Saudi Arabia. She is also the first
female among the Consultative Assembly of Saudi Arabia's members.^[12] Her
contributions were extremely good for biotechnology as well as medical testing.
"My mission is to find simple, inexpensive ways to monitor health that are
specifically designed for remote places and harsh conditions"^[13] Her test
devices were ensured to not require external power or electricity. Sindi never
spoke English or even traveled outside of Saudi Arabia, but she ended up moving
to England to attend a university.^[13] After learning English, she applied to
Cambridge University for biotechnology and was the first female to be accepted
into it.^[13]

Labana of Cordoba

Labana of Cordoba (d.984) was another famous Muslim woman who contributed to
the field of mathematics. Originally a slave-girl of Spanish origin, she rose
to become an important figure in the Umayyad Palace of Cordoba. Thoroughly
versed in the exact sciences, she was fully capable of solving the most complex
geometrical and algebraic problems.^[14]

Sutayta al-Mahamali

She came from a highly educated Baghdadi family (her father, Abu ‘Abdullah
al-Hussein, was a judge and the author of several books on Islamic
jurisprudence).Sutayta, however, excelled in mathematics; proving good at hisab
(arithmetic) and fara'idh (successoral calculations), she invented solutions to
equations which had long been cited by other mathematicians. Although these
equations were few in number, her ability to solve them demonstrates that her
skills in mathematics went beyond a simple aptitude for performing
calculations.^[15]

Maryam al-Astrulabi

[220px-Astrolabe-Persian-18C]


Ibn al-Nadim (d. 998), the famous Muslim biographer and scholar, speaks of a
woman named Al-'Ijiliya in his work al-Fihrist, claiming that she was amongst
the pupils of Bitolus, a well-known tenth-century astrolabe maker who lived in
Baghdad.41 Her full name was Maryam al-Astrulabi (d.967) and she was the
daughter of a famous astrolabe maker, al-‘Ijili al-Astrulabi, who lived in
Aleppo and had likewise been a pupil of Bitolus. Maryam al-‘Ijiliya’s
hand-crafted astrolabe designs were so intricate and innovative that, from 944
to 967, she was employed at the court of Sayf al-Dawlah, a powerful Hamdanid
ruler based in northern Syria.^[16]

Gevher Nesibe Sultan

In the early thirteenth century, Gevher Nesibe Sultan (d. 1206), the daughter
of Kilij Arslan II of the Rum Sultanate, endowed a magnificent complex
comprising a hospital, an adjoining madrasah devoted to medical studies, and a
mosque. Located in Kayseri, Turkey, this complex is considered a pre-eminent
example of Seljuk architecture and is still named after the princess – the
Gevher Nesibe kulliyesi (complex).

Fatima al-Fihri

[220px-Al-Qarawiyyin_courtyard]
Al Qarawiyyin courtyard,2109

The grand college mosque complex of al-Qarawiyin in Fez, which is perhaps the
oldest university in the world, was originally established in 841 by Fatima
al-Fihri. A devout, pious and well educated young woman from Kiroan (Tunisia),
Fatima inherited a large sum of money from her father and decided to use it in
order to give Fez a great centre of learning. She vowed to spend her entire
inheritance to realise this dream and, from these humble beginnings,
al-Qarawiyin developed into a great centre of religious instruction and
political discussion, gradually extending its curriculum to cover all subjects,
particularly the natural sciences (and so hence earning its name as one of the
first universities). At its height, al-Qarawiyin was well-equipped with
astronomical instruments, while its ‘timers room’ had astrolabes, sand clocks
and other instruments for calculating time. Its variety of subjects and
high-quality teaching drew scholars and students from far and wide,
contributing greatly to the flourishing of Islamic civilisation.^[17]

Mariam Al-Otaibi & Bedour Al-Maghrabi

Mariam Al-Otaibi and Bedour Al-Maghrabi invented glasses for people with
cerebral blindness to help them to identify things around them. They received
second place during the 2015 British Invention Show and Awards. The glasses
draw a picture of the area around the person, defines it through spoken words
after analyzing it through a mobile app, and sends it through an earpiece,
according to Arab News.

Bedour Al-Maghrabi, Maha Al-Qahtani, & Thekra Al-Otaibi

Bedour Al-Maghrabi, Maha Al-Qahtani, and Thekra Al-Otaibi received first place
during the 2015 British Invention Show and Awards for inventing a device
designed for sense rehabilitation and stimulation in patients with sensory
neuropathy issues. According to Arab News, the basic premise of the device is
based on the innovation of a new multi-sensory stimulation program, which uses
different senses to help people with impaired sensory systems improve the
affected cell's function. The same invention was ranked in second place at
Korea's International Women's Invention Exposition in 2014.^[18]

Fatima al-Majriti (c. 10th century):

Thought to have been an astronomer from Andalusia, and daughter of astronomer
and mathematician Maslama al-Majriti. There is much debate surrounding the
historical accuracy of the figure of Fatima al-Majriti.

Al-Hakam’s Astronomer (c. 10th century):

She was an astronomer who worked in the palace of the Andalusian Caliph
Al-Hakam al-Mustansir Billah (r. 961–976).

Maryam al-Zenatiyyah (d. 1356):

Skillful in the science of chemistry and poetry. She was from the famous Zenat
Berber Amazighi tribe of Qairawan.

Dahma bint Yahya ibn al-Murtadha (d. 1434):

Zaidi scholar resided in the city of Thila in Yemen, where she taught
jurisprudence. She was also proficient in various sciences, excelling in
grammar, usool, logic, astronomy, chemistry, and poetry.

Abu ‘Abdullah al-Kinani’s assistant (d. 11th century):

She was proficient in medicine, natural science and the knowledge of anatomy
amongst other sciences.

Impact

Islam liberated women from ignorance and discrimination, both of which were
widespread in pre-Islamic society. For the first time in human history, Islam
empowered women with progressive social, legal, political and economic rights.
William Montgomery Watt, for instance, suggested that Muhammad, the Prophet of
Islam (pbuh), “can be seen as a figure who testified on behalf of women’s
rights.”

Organizations

International Forum on Women in Science and Technology in Muslim Countries

The International Forum on Women in Science and Technology in Muslim Countries
was held by the United Nations regarding the changes women have brought in the
sciences in Muslim countries.^[19]

International Society of Muslim Women in Science

Established in 2010, the International Society of Muslim Women in Science
(ISMWS) currently has 300 members from 31 countries. It operates in various
fields such as networking, collaborating, linking institutions across borders,
and highlighting in women for contributing to science.^[20]

See also

  • Women in Islam

References

 1. ↑ Akhmetova, Elmira (2016-10-15). "Women in Islamic Civilisation: Their
    Rights and Contributions". ICR journal – via Google scholar.
 2. 1 2 Hassan, Farkhonda (2000-10-06). "Islamic Women in Science". Science.
    290 (5489): 55–56. doi:10.1126/science.290.5489.55. ISSN 0036-8075. S2CID 
    112995606.
 3. 1 2 3 4 5 Nizamoglu, Cem (2020-02-11). "Women's Contribution to Classical
    Islamic Civilisation: Science, Medicine and Politics". Muslim Heritage.
    Retrieved 2024-03-22.
 4. ↑ Jawad, Haifaa A. (1998). The Rights of Women in Islam: An Authentic
    Approach. London, England: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-333-73458-2
    .
 5. ↑ Suzie (January 1960). "A Man For Every Woman". Psychosomatics. 1 (1): 58.
    doi:10.1016/s0033-3182(60)73055-x. ISSN 0033-3182.
 6. ↑ "Global Connections . Roles of Women". www.pbs.org. Retrieved 2020-04-30.
 7. 1 2 3 4 Akhmedshina, Fania Avzalovna (2023-05-08). "The Role of Muslim
    Women in the Development of Science, Culture and Education in the Period of
    Early Islam". {International Scientific Journal}. 2 (5). doi:10.5281/
    zenodo.7908599.
 8. ↑ "Anousheh Ansari".
 9. 1 2 Leary, Warren E. (2006-09-12). "She Dreamed of the Stars; Now She'll
    Almost Touch Them". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 
    2020-05-01.
10. 1 2 "Anousheh Ansari | Biography, Spaceflight, & Facts". Encyclopedia
    Britannica. Retrieved 2020-04-30.
11. ↑ "NASA Anousheh Ansari" (PDF). Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 
    2020-04-30.
12. ↑ "Hayat Sindi to women: Opt for a career in science". Arab News.
    2013-01-17. Retrieved 2020-05-07.
13. 1 2 3 "Explorers Directory". www.nationalgeographic.org. Retrieved 
    2020-05-07.
14. ↑ Scott, Samuel P. "The History of the Moorish Empire in Europe".
    (Philadelphia & London: J.B. Lippincott Company, 1904). 3: 447–448 – via
    Google scholar.
15. ↑ Al-Hassani, Salim (3 September 2016). "Women's Contribution to Classical
    Islamic Civilisation: Science, Medicine and Politics". muslimheritage.com.
16. ↑ Bickerstaff, Adeline. ""Mariam al-Ijliya al Asturlabi,"". Retrieved 3
    September 2016.
17. ↑ Al-Hassani, Salim (2007). "1001 Inventions: Muslim Heritage in Out
    World". (UK: The Foundation for Science, Technology and Civilisation, 2nd
    ed., 2007) (2): 55.
18. ↑ "Four women inventors make the nation proud". Arab News.
19. ↑ "Women in Science and Technology in Muslim Countries | UN Women -
    Headquarters". unwomen.org. 20 September 2011. Retrieved 2014-03-19.
20. ↑ Nahar, Sultana (2021-01-01). "International Society of Muslim Women in
    Science". {APS March Meeting Abstracts}. 2021: U71.252. Bibcode:
    2021APS..MARU71252N.
