Atomic bombing memorial in Hiroshima. The remains a building with the skeletal
structure of a dome at the top sits among modern Japanese buildings and green
space.
The atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by the United States military at
the end of WWII has shaped Japanese national memory throughout the 20th and
21st Centuries.

Form of collective memory defined by shared experiences and culture

National memory is a form of collective memory defined by shared experiences
and culture. It is an integral part to national identity.

It represents one specific form of cultural memory, which makes an essential
contribution to national group cohesion. Historically national communities have
drawn upon commemorative ceremonies and monuments, myths and rituals, glorified
individuals, objects, and events in their own history to produce a common
narrative.^[1]

According to Lorraine Ryan, national memory is based on the public's reception
of national historic narratives and the ability of people to affirm the
legitimacy of these narratives.

A large pickup truck has three clearly visible flags mounted onto it. The
modern US flag, the Confederate Battle flag, and a Confederate National flag.
Conflicting versions of national memory can be seen in this image, as the
modern United States flag is flown alongside a Confederate National flag and a
Confederate Battle flag. These flags represent the legacy of two armies that
were historically in direct conflict with one another during the American Civil
War. Despite two of these flags representing an enemy of the United States,
they are all flown together with the intention of communicating the owner's
modern patriotism.

Conflicting versions, dynamicity, manipulation and subjectivity

National memory typically consists of a shared interpretation of a nation's
past.^[2] Such interpretations can vary and sometimes compete.^[2] They can get
challenged and augmented by a range of interest groups, fighting to have their
histories acknowledged, documented and commemorated and reshape national
stories.^[3] Often national memory is adjusted to offer a politicized vision of
the past to make a political position appear consistent with national identity.
^[4] Furthermore, it profoundly affects how historical facts are perceived and
recorded and may circumvent or appropriate facts.^[4] A repertoire of
discursive strategies functions to emotionalize national narrative and
nationalize personal pasts.^[5]

National memory has been used calculatedly by governments for dynastic,
political, religious and cultural purposes since as early as the sixteenth
century.^[6]

Marketing of memory by the culture industry and its instrumentalisation for
political purposes can both be seen as serious threats to the objective
understanding of a nation's past.^[7]

Lorraine Ryan notes that individual memory both shapes and is shaped by
national memory, and that there is a competition between the dominant and
individual memories of a nation.^[8]

Hyung Park states that the nation is continuously revived, re-imagined,
reconstituted, through shared memories among its citizens.^[9]

National memories may also conflict with the other nations' collective memory.^
[10]

Role of the media

Reports that are narrated in terms of national memory characterize the past in
ways that merge the past, the present and the future into "a single ongoing
tale".^[11]

Pierre Nora argues that a "democratisation of history" allows for emancipatory
versions of the past to surface:^[7]

    National memory cannot come into being until the historical framework of
    the nation has been shattered. It reflects the abandonment of the
    traditional channels and modes of transmission of the past and the
    desacralisation of such primary sites of initiation as the school, the
    family, the museum, and the monument: what was once the responsibility of
    these institutions has now flowed over into the public domain and been
    taken over by the media and tourist industry

    — Nora 1998, 363^[11]^[7]

However, national history being passed on by the culture industry, such as by
historical films, can be seen as serious threats to the objective understanding
of a nation's past.^[7]

International media

See also: Global news flow, Category:Cultural exchange, and International
communication

Nations' memories can be shared across nations via media such as the Internet
(through social media and other means of widespread communication) and news
outlets.^[12]^[13]

Effects and functions

National memory can be a force of cohesion as well as division and conflict. It
can foster constructive national reforms, international communities and
agreements,^[4] dialogue as well as deepen problematic courses and rhetoric.

Identity crisis can occur in a country due to large-scale negative events such
as crime, terroristic attacks (on a national or international scale), war, and
large changes made over a short period of time. The negative mood created by
these events will eventually find a way to be expressed.^[4]^[14] This crisis
can also occur during periods of economic political uncertainty, which can lead
to citizens becoming uncertain of and questioning their own identities or
losing them altogether.^[15]

New developments, processes, problems and events are often made sense of and
contextualized by drawing from national memory.

Critical national memory

Critical history or historic memory cuts from national memory's tradition
centric to national heritage and orients itself towards a specialized study of
history in a more sociological manner.^[12]

It has been proposed that the unthinkable ought not to be unmasked but that
instead what made it thinkable should be reconstructed and that the difficulty
of discussing the non-places or the bad places of national memory make it
necessary to include forgetfulness and amnesia in the concept.^[16] The absence
of belief in a shared past may be another factor.^[4]

National memory may lead to questioning the nation as it is as well as its
identity and imply a societal negotiation of what the country wishes to be as a
nation. To understand the links between memory, forgetfulness, identity and the
imaginary construction of the nation analysis of the discourse in the places of
memory is fundamental as in all writings of national history an image of the
nation is being restructured.^[16]

See also

  • Every Second Counts (video contest)
  • Holocaust Memorial Days
  • National heritage site
  • Cultural heritage
  • Memory space (social science)
  • National memorial
  • National monument
  • Memory work
  • External memory (psychology)
  • Identity formation
  • Historical negationism
  • Media manipulation
  • Genocide denial
  • National History Museum
  • National archives
  • National day
  • Education
  • Public opinion
  • Reconstructive memory
  • Social amnesia
  • Collective trauma
      □ Transgenerational trauma
  • Collective behavior
  • Les Lieux de Mémoire
  • War memorial

References

 1. ↑ "Memory, History, and Colonialism" (PDF). German Historical Institute
    London. 2009. Retrieved 3 March 2017.
 2. 1 2 Paces, Cynthia (September 2009). Prague Panoramas: National Memory and
    Sacred Space in the Twentieth Century. University of Pittsburgh Pre. ISBN 
    9780822977674. Retrieved 3 March 2017.
 3. ↑ Weedon, Chris; Jordan, Glenn (April 2012). "Collective memory: theory and
    politics". Social Semiotics. 22 (2): 143–153. doi:10.1080/
    10350330.2012.664969. S2CID 144517857.
 4. 1 2 3 4 5 Graber, Samuel J. Twice-divided Nation: The Civil War and
    National Memory in the Transatlantic World. ISBN 9781109024135. Retrieved 3
    March 2017.
 5. ↑ White, Geoffrey M. (December 1999). "Emotional Remembering: The
    Pragmatics of National Memory". Ethos. 27 (4): 505–529. doi:10.1525/
    eth.1999.27.4.505. Retrieved 3 March 2017.
 6. ↑ Gillis, John R. (1994). Commemorations: The Politics of National Identity
    . Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691029253.
 7. 1 2 3 4 Bruyn, Dieter De. "World War 2.0: Commemorating War and Holocaust
    in Poland through Facebook". Digital Icons. ISSN 2043-7633.
 8. ↑ Ryan, Lorraine (28 November 2012). "Cosmopolitan memory and national
    memory conflicts: On the dynamics of their interaction". Journal of
    Sociology. 50 (4): 501–514. doi:10.1177/1440783312467097. S2CID 145565890.
 9. ↑ Park, Hyung yu (April 2011). "Shared national memory as intangible
    heritage". Annals of Tourism Research. 38 (2): 520–539. doi:10.1016/
    j.annals.2010.11.013. Retrieved 3 March 2017.
10. ↑ Pomian, Krzysztof. "Divided memory: European sites of memory as political
    and cultural phenomenon" (in Polish). Retrieved 3 March 2017.
11. 1 2 Garde-Hansen, Joanne (29 June 2011). Media and Memory. Edinburgh
    University Press. ISBN 9780748688883. Retrieved 3 March 2017.
12. 1 2 Koshar, Rudy J. (9 November 2000). Germany's Transient Pasts:
    Preservation and National Memory in the Twentieth Century. Univ of North
    Carolina Press. ISBN 9780807862629. Retrieved 3 March 2017.
13. ↑ Neiger, Motti; Meyers, Oren; Zandberg, Eyal (2011), Neiger, Motti;
    Meyers, Oren; Zandberg, Eyal (eds.), "On Media Memory: Editors'
    Introduction", On Media Memory: Collective Memory in a New Media Age,
    Palgrave Macmillan Memory Studies, London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp. 1–24,
    doi:10.1057/9780230307070_1, ISBN 978-0-230-30707-0, retrieved 2021-03-20
14. ↑ Snegovaya, Maria (2015-05-17). "National Identity Crises Threaten World
    Order". The Moscow Times. Retrieved 2021-03-20.
15. ↑ "Globalization and Identity Crisis: A Theoretical Explanation and the
    Turkish Example". ResearchGate. Retrieved 2021-03-20.
16. 1 2 Montaño, Eugenia Allier. "Places of memory. Is the concept applicable
    to the analysis of memorial struggles? The case of Uruguay and its recent
    past" (PDF). Retrieved 3 March 2017. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal
    requires |journal= (help)

Further reading

  • Les Lieux de Mémoire
  • Koshar, Rudy J. (9 November 2000). Germany's Transient Pasts: Preservation
    and National Memory in the Twentieth Century. Univ of North Carolina Press.
    ISBN 9780807862629.

                                   • v
                                   • t
                                   • e

                     National memory institutions
  • Czechia
      □ Institute for the Study of Totalitarian Regimes
  • Estonia
      □ Estonian Institute of Historical Memory
  • Lithuania
      □ Genocide and Resistance Research Centre of Lithuania
  • Poland
      □ Institute of National Remembrance‎
  • Romania
      □ Institute for the Investigation of Communist Crimes in Romania
  • Slovakia
      □ Nation's Memory Institute
  • Ukraine
      □ Ukrainian Institute of National Memory
