Terrarium housing an ecosystem with living plants, animals and micro-organisms

[248px-Phyllobates_terribilis_vivar]
Dart frogs housed in a heavily planted bioactive display terrarium

A bioactive terrarium (or vivarium) is a terrarium for housing one or more
terrestrial animal species that includes live plants and populations of small
invertebrates and microorganisms to consume and break down the waste products
of the primary species. In a functional bioactive terrarium, the waste products
will be broken down by these detritivores, reducing or eliminating the need for
cage cleaning. Bioactive vivariums are used by zoos and hobbyists to house
reptiles and amphibians in an aesthetically pleasing and enriched environment.

Enclosure

Any terrarium can be made bioactive by addition of the appropriate substrate,
plants, and detritivores. Bioactive enclosures are often maintained as display
terraria constructed of PVC, wood, glass and/or acrylic. Bioactive enclosures
in laboratory "rack" style caging are uncommon.^[citation needed]

Cleanup crew

[249px-Isopods_consuming_snake_shed]
Isopods consuming a snake's shed skin in a bioactive terrarium

Waste products of the primary species are consumed by a variety of
detritivores, referred to as the "cleanup crew" by hobbyists.^[1]^[2]^[3] These
can include woodlice, springtails, earthworms, millipedes, and various beetles,
with different species being preferred in different habitats - the cleanup crew
for a tropical rainforest bioactive terrarium may rely primarily on
springtails, isopods, and earthworms, while a desert habitat might use beetles.
^[4]^[5]^[6]^[7] If the primary species is insectivorous, they may consume the
cleanup crew, and thus the cleanup crew must have sufficient retreats to avoid
being completely depopulated.^[4]

Additionally, bioactive terraria typically have a flourishing population of
bacteria and other microorganisms which break down the wastes of the cleanup
crew and primary species.^[8] Fungi may occur as part of the terrarium cycle
and will be consumed by the cleanup crew.^[9]^[4]^[5]

Substrate

[241px-Starr-080117-1726-Epipremnu]
Golden Pothos (Epipremnum aureum) is frequently used in bioactive terrariums
due to its hardiness and ability to remove nitrogenous waste

Bioactive enclosures require some form of substrate to grow plants and to
provide habitat for the cleanup crew. The choice of substrate is typically
determined by the habitat of the primary species (e.g. jungle vs desert), and
created by mixing a variety of components such as organic topsoil (free of
pesticides and non-biological fertilizers), peat, coco fiber, sand, long-fiber
sphagnum moss, cypress mulch, and orchid bark in varying proportions.^[3]

In wet habitats, there is typically a drainage layer beneath the substrate to
allow water to pool without saturating the substrate.^[10]^[2] The drainage
layer may be constructed via coarse gravel, stones, expanded clay aggregate, or
may be wholly synthetic; the drainage layer is typically separated from the
overlying substrate with a fine plastic mesh.^[3]^[10] Additionally, some
bioactive terraria include leaf-litter, which can serve as food and
microhabitat for the cleanup crew.^[3]

Plants

The use of live plants in a bioactive terrarium provides cover for animals
inhabiting the enclosure, is aesthetically pleasing in a display enclosure, and
can help to absorb nitrogenous wastes that could otherwise build up in a
system.^[3]^[10]^[2] Providing a variety of plants that will grow in and be
clipped back during maintenance provides hiding spots for terrarium inhabitants
that change over time. This is a form of enrichment recommended for keeping
reptiles.^[11]

[245px-Bioactive_Arid_Vivarium]
A bioactive arid vivarium for housing leopard geckos

References

 1. ↑ "Bioactivity and Me - What to Know Before You Go Bioactive". Josh's Frogs
    How-To Guides. 2019-07-17. Retrieved 2020-02-11.
 2. 1 2 3 "10JulAndersonGlass". www.chameleonnews.com. Retrieved 2020-02-12.
 3. 1 2 3 4 5 LLC, New England Herpetoculture. "New England Herpetoculture LLC"
    . www.neherpetoculture.com. Retrieved 2020-02-13.
 4. 1 2 3 LLC, New England Herpetoculture. "New England Herpetoculture LLC".
    www.neherpetoculture.com. Retrieved 2020-02-13.
 5. 1 2 "Cleanup Crew Showdown—Springtails Vs. Earthworms". The Tye-Dyed Iguana
    - Reptiles and Reptile Supplies in St. Louis. Retrieved 2020-02-13.
 6. ↑ "Cleanup Crew Showdown—Isopods Vs. Millipedes". The Tye-Dyed Iguana -
    Reptiles and Reptile Supplies in St. Louis. Retrieved 2020-02-13.
 7. ↑ Rolfe, Gary (2017-12-07). "How to Create an Arid Bioactive Vivarium |
    Reptile Centre". Northampton Reptile Centre. Retrieved 2020-02-13.
 8. ↑ "How To Build A Bioactive Enclosure For Your Crested Gecko".
    www.reptilesmagazine.com. Retrieved 2020-02-11.
 9. ↑ "Vivarium Construction 102". Archived from the original on 2013-07-02.
10. 1 2 3 Amphibian Husbandry Resource Guide, Edition 2.0 (PDF). Association of
    Zoos and Aquariums. 2012. pp. 8–17.
11. ↑ "Suggested Guidelines for Reptile Enrichment" (PDF). American Association
    of Zookeepers. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-11-13.
