Sociological effect

Distance decay is a geographical term which describes the effect of distance on
cultural or spatial interactions.^[1] The distance decay effect states that the
interaction between two locales declines as the distance between them
increases. Once the distance is outside of the two locales' activity space,
their interactions begin to decrease. It is thus an assertion that the
mathematics of the inverse square law in physics can be applied to many
geographic phenomena, and is one of the ways in which physics principles such
as gravity are often applied metaphorically to geographic situations.

Mathematical models

Main article: Inverse square law

Distance decay is graphically represented by a curving line that swoops
concavely downward as distance along the x-axis increases. Distance decay can
be mathematically represented as an inverse-square law by the expression

    I = constant × d − 2 {\displaystyle I={\text{constant}}\times d^{-2}} {\
    displaystyle I={\text{constant}}\times d^{-2}}

or

    I ∝ 1 / d 2 , {\displaystyle I\propto 1/d^{2},} {\displaystyle I\propto 1/d
    ^{2},}

where I is interaction and d is distance. In practice, it is often
parameterized to fit a specific situation, such as

    I = A ( d + B ) k , {\displaystyle I={\frac {A}{(d+B)^{k}}},} {\
    displaystyle I={\frac {A}{(d+B)^{k}}},}

in which the constant A is a vertical stretching factor, B is a horizontal
shift (so that the curve has a y-axis intercept at a finite value), and k is
the decay power.

It can take other forms such as negative exponential,^[2] i.e.

    I ∝ e − d . {\displaystyle I\propto e^{-d}.} {\displaystyle I\propto e^
    {-d}.}

In addition to fitting the parameters, a cutoff value can be added to a
distance decay function to specify a distance beyond which spatial interaction
drops to zero, or to delineate a "zone of indifference" in which all
interactions have the same strength.^[3]

Applications

Distance decay is evident in town/city centres. It can refer to various things
which decline with greater distance from the center of the central business
district (CBD):

  • density of pedestrian traffic
  • street quality
  • quality of shops (depending on definitions of 'quality' and 'center')
  • height of buildings
  • price of land

Distance decay weighs into the decision to migrate, leading many migrants to
move less far.

With the advent of faster travel and communications technology, such as
telegraphs, telephones, broadcasting, and internet, the effects of distance
have been reduced, a trend known as time-space convergence.^[4] Exceptions
include places previously connected by now-abandoned railways, for example,
have fallen off the beaten path.

Related concepts

Related terms include "friction of distance", which describes the forces that
create the distance decay effect. Waldo R. Tobler's "First law of geography",
an informal statement that "All things are related, but near things are more
related than far things," and the mathematical principle spatial
autocorrelation are similar expressions of distance decay effects. "Loss of
Strength Gradient" holds that the amount of a nation's military power that
could be brought to bear in any part of the world depends on geographic
distance.

See also

  • Concentric zone model
  • Concepts and Techniques in Modern Geography
  • Gravity model
  • Inverse distance weighting
  • Inverse-square law
  • The Isolated State
  • Trip distribution
  • Tobler's first law of geography
  • Tobler's second law of geography

References

  • Taverna, Kristin; Xi, Weimin. "Working Group on Distance Decay". University
    of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Archived from the original on 2011-09-30.
    Retrieved 2006-08-31.
  • De Blij, Harm J.; Murphy, Alexander B.; Fouberg, Erin Hogan (2007). Human
    geography: people, place, and culture (8th ed.). New York: J. Wiley. pp. 
    68–69. ISBN 978-0-471-67951-6. OCLC 62132765.

 1. ↑ Taylor, Peter J. (1983). Distance Decay in Spatial Interactions (PDF).
    Geo Abstracts. ISBN 0-86094-090-X. OCLC 12306293.
 2. ↑ Nekola, Jeffrey C.; White, Peter S. (July 1999). "The distance decay of
    similarity in biogeography and ecology" (PDF). Journal of Biogeography. 26
    (4): 867–878. Bibcode:1999JBiog..26..867N. doi:10.1046/
    j.1365-2699.1999.00305.x. ISSN 0305-0270.
 3. ↑ Grekousis, George (2020). Spatial analysis methods and practice (First 
    ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. pp. 20–23. ISBN 
    978-1-108-61452-8.
 4. ↑ Matous, Petr; Todo, Yasuyuki; Mojo, Dagne (July 2013). "Boots are made
    for walking: interactions across physical and social space in
    infrastructure-poor regions". Journal of Transport Geography. 31: 226–235.
    Bibcode:2013JTGeo..31..226M. doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.04.001.
