       This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss
       these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these
       messages)

                This article needs additional citations for verification.
                Please help improve this article by adding citations to
                reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and
       [50px-Q] removed.
                Find sources: "Spatial mismatch" – news · newspapers · books ·
[40px]          scholar · JSTOR (July 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this
                message)
       
             The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with
       Globe the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the
       icon. subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the
             talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (October 2014)
             (Learn how and when to remove this message)

       (Learn how and when to remove this message)

[240px-ClassCanalStreetNewOrleans]
According to the spatial mismatch theory, opportunities for low-income people
are located far away from where they live.

Spatial mismatch is the mismatch between where low-income households reside and
suitable job opportunities. In its original formulation (see below) and in
subsequent research, it has mostly been understood as a phenomenon affecting
African-Americans, as a result of residential segregation, economic
restructuring, and the suburbanization of employment.

Spatial mismatch was first proposed by John F. Kain, following the theory of
John Meyer, in a seminal 1968 article, "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment,
and Metropolitan Decentralization".^[1] That article did not specifically use
the term "spatial mismatch", and Kain disclaimed credit.^[2]

In 1987, William Julius Wilson was an important exponent, elaborating the role
of economic restructuring, as well as the departure of the black middle-class,
in the development of a ghetto underclass in the United States.^[3]

History

[240px-Ingram_Park_Mall1]
Suburban shopping malls took employment out of the inner city.

After World War I, many wealthy Americans started decentralizing out of the
cities and into the suburbs. During the second half of the 20th century,
department stores followed the trend of moving into the suburbs. In 1968, Kain
formulated the “Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis”, but he did not refer to it by
this term. His hypothesis was that black workers reside in segregated zones
that are distant and poorly connected to major centers of growth. The
phenomenon has many implications for inner-city residents dependent on
low-level entry jobs. For example, distance from work centers can lead to
increasing unemployment rates and further dampen poverty outcomes for the
region at large. Since its conceptualization in the late 1960s, the spatial
mismatch hypothesis has been widely cited to explain the economic problems
encountered by inner-city minorities.^[4]

Factors

In 2007, Laurent Gobillon, Harris Selod, and Yves Zenou suggested that there
are seven different factors that support the spatial mismatch phenomenon.^[5]
Four factors are attributed to potential workers accessibility and initiatives.
The remaining three factors stress employers' reluctance to divert away from
the negative stigma of city people and in particular minorities when hiring.

Potential workers perspectives

[240px-Pruitt-igoeUSGS02]
Urban redevelopment projects such as Pruitt–Igoe in St. Louis concentrated and
separated workers from their surroundings and work. Such projects created a
ghettoized underclass in America.

  • Commuting cost is seen as an obstacle for inner-city people to be present
    for job interviews and furthermore to arrive to work everyday on time. In
    other words, cars may be too expensive for some workers and they may have
    to rely heavily on public transportation. Public transportation is
    problematic in a sense that it is not always prompt and may not stop at all
    job location sites.
  • Information access to jobs decreases as distance increases away from the
    job center. People who are living away from the job center are generally
    less knowledgeable about potential openings than individuals who live
    closer to the job center. Therefore, networking and information spillovers
    are of a major advantage in accessing information about potential openings.
  • There seems to be a lack of incentive for distance workers to search
    intensively for a job that is relatively far away. Gobillion, Selod and
    Zenou believe that minorities, more or less, do a tradeoff between
    short-term loss and long-term benefits. The short term loss involves making
    frequent search trips to distant work centers. However, the long-term
    benefit involves obtaining a stable job and thus a higher wage rate.
    Unfortunately, minorities tend to weigh the short-term loss higher than the
    long-term benefits and as a result, decrease their opportunity at obtaining
    a job in the suburbs.
  • There also seems to be a high search cost involve for urban workers looking
    for a job in the suburbs. It might be associated with paying a job agency
    to expand their search beyond the urban residential area or locating an
    agency in the suburbs.

China

Growth of ghost cities in China, mostly from not yet agglomerated areas between
or adjacent metropolitan areas or coal mining towns, as in the case of the most
famous example, Kangbashi New Area of Ordos, are an example of spatial
mismatch. In the case of places near metropolitan areas, it represents less of
a risk going forward than in mining areas.

See also

  • Involuntary unemployment
  • Reverse commute
  • Theory of alienation

References

 1. ↑ Kain, John F. (1968). "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and
    Metropolitan Decentralization". Quarterly Journal of Economics. 82 (2): 
    175–197. doi:10.2307/1885893. JSTOR 1885893.
 2. ↑ Kain, John F. (2004). "A pioneer's perspective on the spatial mismatch
    literature". Urban Studies. 41 (1): 7–32. Bibcode:2004UrbSt..41....7K.
    CiteSeerX 10.1.1.199.6655. doi:10.1080/0042098032000155669. S2CID 154650017
    .
 3. ↑ Wilson, William Julius (1987). The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City,
    the Underclass, and Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
    ISBN 978-0-226-90130-5.
 4. ↑ Caves, R. W. (2004). Encyclopedia of the City. Routledge. pp. 622. ISBN 
    9780415252256.
 5. ↑ Gobillon, Laurent; Selod, Harris; Zenou, Yves (2007). "The Mechanisms of
    Spatial Mismatch". Urban Studies. 44 (12): 2401–2427. Bibcode:
    2007UrbSt..44.2401G. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.408.4303. doi:10.1080/
    00420980701540937. S2CID 3269814.
