       This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss
       these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these
       messages)

                This article needs additional citations for verification.
                Please help improve this article by adding citations to
                reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and
       [50px-Q] removed.
                Find sources: "Artificial psychology" – news · newspapers ·
                books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2008) (Learn how and when to
[40px]          remove this message)
       
                This article cites Wikipedia (or sources that take information
                from Wikipedia) in a circular manner. Please help improve this
                article by repairing any insufficient attribution if necessary
       [50px-Q] and adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced or poorly
                sourced material may be challenged and removed.
                Find sources: "Artificial psychology" – news · newspapers ·
                books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2019) (Learn how and when to
                remove this message)

       (Learn how and when to remove this message)

Artificial psychology (AP) has had multiple meanings dating back to 19th
century, with recent usage related to artificial intelligence (AI).

In 1999, Zhiliang Wang and Lun Xie presented a theory of artificial psychology
based on artificial intelligence. They analyze human psychology using
information science research methods and artificial intelligence research to
probe deeper into the human mind.^[1]^[2]

Main Theory

Dan Curtis (b. 1963) proposed AP is a theoretical discipline.^[citation needed]
The theory considers the situation when an artificial intelligence approaches
the level of complexity where the intelligence meets two conditions:

Condition I

  • A: Makes all of its decisions autonomously
  • B: Is capable of making decisions based on information that is

     1. New
     2. Abstract
     3. Incomplete

  • C: The artificial intelligence is capable of reprogramming itself based on
    the new data, allowing it to evolve.
  • D: And is capable of resolving its own programming conflicts, even in the
    presence of incomplete data. This means that the intelligence autonomously
    makes value-based decisions, referring to values that the intelligence has
    created for itself.

Condition II

  • All four criteria are met in situations that are not part of the original
    operating program

When both conditions are met, then, according to this theory, the possibility
exists that the intelligence will reach irrational conclusions based on real or
created information. At this point, the criteria are met for intervention which
will not necessarily be resolved by simple re-coding of processes due to
extraordinarily complex nature of the codebase itself; but rather a discussion
with the intelligence in a format which more closely resembles classical
(human) psychology.

If the intelligence cannot be reprogrammed by directly inputting new code, but
requires the intelligence to reprogram itself through a process of analysis and
decision based on information provided by a human, in order for it to overcome
behavior which is inconsistent with the machines purpose or ability to function
normally, then artificial psychology is by definition, what is required.

The level of complexity that is required before these thresholds are met is
currently a subject of extensive debate. The theory of artificial psychology
does not address the specifics of what those levels may be, but only that the
level is sufficiently complex that the intelligence cannot simply be recoded by
a software developer, and therefore dysfunctionality must be addressed through
the same processes that humans must go through to address their own
dysfunctionalities. Along the same lines, artificial psychology does not
address the question of whether or not the intelligence is conscious.

As of 2022, the level of artificial intelligence does not approach any
threshold where any of the theories or principles of artificial psychology can
even be tested, and therefore, artificial psychology remains a largely
theoretical discipline. Even at a theoretical level, artificial psychology
remains an advanced stage of artificial intelligence.

References

 1. ↑ Wang, Zhiliang (2007). "Artificial Psychology". In Smith, Michael J.;
    Salvendy, Gavriel (eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 4557.
    Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 208–217. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73345-4_25.
    ISBN 9783540733454. S2CID 13060657. {{cite book}}: |journal= ignored (help)
    ; Missing or empty |title= (help)
 2. ↑ Zhiliang Wang; Lun Xie (July 1999). "Artificial psychology: An attainable
    scientific research on the human brain". Proceedings of the Second
    International Conference on Intelligent Processing and Manufacturing of
    Materials. IPMM'99 (Cat. No.99EX296). Vol. 2. pp. 1067–1072 vol.2. doi:
    10.1109/IPMM.1999.791528. ISBN 0-7803-5489-3. S2CID 58482917.

Further reading

  • Holstein, Hans Jürgen; Stålberg, Lennart (1974). Homo Cyberneticus:
    Artificial psychology and generative micro-sociology. Sociografica.
  • Lu, Quan; Chen, Jing; Meng, Bo (2006). "Web Personalization Based on
    Artificial Psychology". In Feng, Ling; Wang, Guoren; Zeng, Cheng; Huang,
    Ruhua (eds.). Web Information Systems – WISE 2006 Workshops. Lecture Notes
    in Computer Science. Vol. 4256. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 223–229.
    doi:10.1007/11906070_22. ISBN 9783540476641.
  • Crowder, James A.; Friess, Shelli (2012). Artificial psychology: the
    psychology of AI (PDF). Proceedings of the 3rd annual international
    multi-conference on informatics and etics. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.368.170.
  • Artificial psychology: an attainable scientific research on the human
    brain. (1999). Proceedings of the Second International Conference on
    Intelligent Processing and Manufacturing of Materials. IPMM’99 (Cat.
    No.99EX296), Intelligent Processing and Manufacturing of Materials, 1999.
    IPMM ’99. Proceedings of the Second International Conference On, 1067. doi:
    10.1109/IPMM.1999.791528
