The chemical state of a chemical element is due to its electronic, chemical and
physical properties as it exists in combination with itself or a group of one
or more other elements. A chemical state is often defined as an "oxidation
state" when referring to metal cations. When referring to organic materials, a
chemical state is usually defined as a chemical group, which is a group of
several elements bonded together.^[1]^[2]^[3]^[4]^[5]^[6]^[7] Material
scientists, solid state physicists, analytical chemists, surface scientists and
spectroscopists describe or characterize the chemical, physical and/or
electronic nature of the surface or the bulk regions of a material as having or
existing as one or more chemical states.

Overview

The chemical state set comprises and encompasses these subordinate groups and
entities: chemical species, functional group, anion, cation, oxidation state,
chemical compound and elemental forms of an element.

This term or phrase is commonly used when interpreting data from analytical
techniques such as:

  • Auger electron spectroscopy (AES)
  • Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, EDX)
  • Infrared spectroscopy (IR, FT-IR, ATR)
  • Liquid chromatography (LC, HPLC)
  • Mass spectrometry (MS, ToF-SIMS, D-SIMS)
  • Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR, H-NMR, C-NMR, X-NMR)
  • Photoemission spectroscopy (PES, UPS)
  • Raman spectroscopy (FT-Raman)
  • Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis)
  • X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCA)
  • Wavelength dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (WDX, WDS)

Significance

The chemical state of a group of elements, can be similar to, but not identical
to, the chemical state of another similar group of elements because the two
groups have different ratios of the same elements and exhibit different
chemical, electronic, and physical properties that can be detected by various
spectroscopic techniques.

A chemical state can exist on or inside the surface of a solid state material
and can often, but not always, be isolated or separated from the other chemical
species found on the surface of that material. Surface scientists,
spectroscopists, chemical analysts, and material scientists frequently describe
the chemical nature of the chemical species, functional group, anion, or cation
detected on the surface and near the surface of a solid state material as its
chemical state.

To understand how a chemical state differs from an oxidation state, anion, or
cation, compare sodium fluoride (NaF) to polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE,
Teflon). Both contain fluorine, the most electronegative element, but only NaF
dissolves in water to form separate ions, Na^+ and F^−. The electronegativity
of the fluorine strongly polarizes the electron density that exists between the
carbon and the fluorine, but not enough to produce ions which would allow it to
dissolve in the water. The carbon and fluorine in Teflon (PTFE) both have an
electronic charge of zero since they form a covalent bond, but few scientists
describe those elements as having an oxidation state of zero. On the other
hand, many elements, in their pure form, are often described as existing with
an oxidation state of zero. This is one of the attributes of nomenclature that
has been upheld over the years.

Closely related nomenclature

The chemical state of an element is often confused with its oxidation state.
The chemical state of an element or a group of elements that has a non-zero
ionic charge, e.g. (1+), (2+), (3+), (1-), (2-) (3-), is defined as the
oxidation state of that element or group of elements. Elements or chemical
groups that have an ionic charge can usually be dissolved to form ions in
either water or another polar solvent. Such a compound or salt is described as
an ionic compound with ionic bonds which means that, in effect, all of the
electron density of one or more valence electrons has been transferred from the
less electronegative group of elements to the more electronegative group of
elements. In the case of a non-ionic compound the chemical bonds are non-ionic
such meaning the compound will probably not dissolve in water or another polar
solvent. Many non-ionic compounds have chemical bonds that share the electron
density that binds them together. This type of chemical bond is either a
non-polar covalent bond or a polar covalent bond.

A functional group is very similar to a chemical species and a chemical group.
A chemical group or chemical species exhibits a distinctive reaction behavior
or a distinctive spectral signal when analyzed by various spectroscopic
methods. These three groupings are often used to describe the groups of
elements that exist within an organic molecule.

Examples of chemical names that describe the chemical state of a group of
elements

The following list of neutral compounds, anions, cations, functional groups and
chemical species is a partial list of the many groups of elements that can
exhibit or have a unique "chemical state" while being part of the surface or
the bulk of a solid state material.

  • Metal oxide
  • Metal hydroxide
  • Metal carbonate
  • Inorganic carbonate
  • Fluoro-ether
  • Organofluoride
  • Organic type chlorine
  • Inorganic type chlorine
  • Trifluoromethyl
  • Difluoromethyl
  • Benzyl group
  • Phenyl group
  • Carbonyl bond
  • Ether Group
  • Alcohol bond
  • Organic acid
  • Double bond
  • Triple bond
  • Inorganic acid
  • Organic ester
  • Metal ester
  • Organic carbonate
  • Nitrile group
  • Cyanide ion
  • Perchlorate ion
  • Sodium ion
  • Lithium ion
  • Magnesium ion
  • Calcium ion
  • Lead ion
  • Sulfate ion
  • Phosphate ion
  • Silicate group
  • Stannate group
  • Halide ion
  • Fluoride ion
  • Chloride ion
  • Bromide ion
  • Iodide ion
  • Chalcogenide group
  • Sulfide group
  • Halide group
  • Metal sulfide
  • Organic sulfide
  • Metal selenide
  • Telluride
  • Nitride
  • Nitrite ion
  • Nitrate ion
  • Phosphide
  • Arsenide
  • Antimonide
  • Silicide
  • Silicate
  • Gallate
  • Germanate
  • Tungstate
  • Niobate
  • Ferric ion
  • Ferrous ion
  • Ferride
  • Ferrate
  • Rhenate
  • Mercurous
  • Mercuric ion
  • Mercurate
  • Thallate
  • Thallic ion

See also

  • X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
  • Photoemission spectroscopy

References

 1. ↑ John T. Grant; David Briggs (2003). Surface Analysis by Auger and X-ray
    Photoelectron Spectroscopy. IM Publications. ISBN 978-1-901019-04-9.
 2. ↑ Martin P. Seah; David Briggs (1983). Practical Surface Analysis by Auger
    and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-26279-4.
 3. ↑ Martin P. Seah; David Briggs (1992). Practical Surface Analysis by Auger
    and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (2nd ed.). Wiley & Sons. ISBN 
    978-0-471-92082-3.
 4. ↑ "ISO 18115:2001 — Surface Chemical Analysis — Vocabulary". International
    Organization for Standardization, TC/201. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal
    requires |journal= (help)
 5. ↑ C.D. Wagner; W.M. Riggs; L.E. Davis; J.F. Moulder; G.E. Mullenberg
    (1979). Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Perkin-Elmer Corp.
 6. ↑ B. Vincent Crist (2000). Handbook of Monochromatic XPS Spectra - The
    Elements and Native Oxides. Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-49265-8.
 7. ↑ B. Vincent Crist (2000). Handbook of Monochromatic XPS Spectra -
    Semiconductors. Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-49266-5.
